# Readings pack: lab_applied_normative_ethics

The following passages are the readings the agent should reference. Cite specific lines or paragraphs when pointing the student toward them. Do not summarise unprompted.

=== Aldous Huxley — Brave New World, Chapter 16 (Being Human) ===

Sixteen

THE ROOM into which the three were ushered was the Controller’s study.

“His fordship will be down in a moment.” The Gamma butler left them to
themselves.

Helmholtz laughed aloud.

“It’s more like a caffeine-solution party than a trial,” he said, and let himself fall
into the most luxurious of the pneumatic arm-chairs. “Cheer up, Bernard,” he
added, catching sight of his friend’s green unhappy face. But Bernard would
not be cheered; without answering, without even looking at Helmholtz, he went
and sat down on the most uncomfortable chair in the room, carefully chosen in
the obscure hope of somehow deprecating the wrath of the higher powers.

The Savage meanwhile wandered restlessly round the room, peering with a
vague superﬁcial inquisitiveness at the books in the shelves, at the sound- track
rolls and reading machine bobbins in their numbered pigeon-holes. On the
table under the window lay a massive volume bound in limp black leather-
surrogate, and stamped with large golden T’s. He picked it up and opened
it. MY LIFE AND WORK, BY OUR FORD. The book had been published at
Detroit by the Society for the Propagation of Fordian Knowledge. Idly he turned
the pages, read a sentence here, a paragraph there, and had just come to the
conclusion that the book didn’t interest him, when the door opened, and the
Resident World Controller for Western Europe walked briskly into the room.

Mustapha Mond shook hands with all three of them; but it was to the Savage
that he addressed himself. “So you don’t much like civilization, Mr. Savage,”
he said.

The Savage looked at him. He had been prepared to lie, to bluster, to remain
sullenly unresponsive; but, reassured by the good-humoured intelligence of the
Controller’s face, he decided to tell the truth, straightforwardly. “No.” He sho-
ok his head.

149


150

IDPH

Bernard started and looked horriﬁed. What would the Controller think? To
be labelled as the friend of a man who said that he didn’t like civilization-said
it openly and, of all people, to the Controller-it was terrible. “But, John,” he
began. A look from Mustapha Mond reduced him to an abject silence.

“Of course,” the Savage went on to admit, “there are some very nice things. All
that music in the air, for instance .”

“Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments will hum about my ears and
sometimes voices.”

The Savage’s face lit up with a sudden pleasure. “Have you read it too?” he
asked. “I thought nobody knew about that book here, in England.”

It’s prohibited, you see. But as
“Almost nobody.
I make the laws here, I can also break them. With impunity, Mr. Marx,” he
added, turning to Bernard. “Which I’m afraid you can’t do.”

I’m one of the very few.

Bernard sank into a yet more hopeless misery.

“But why is it prohibited?” asked the Savage. In the excitement of meeting a
man who had read Shakespeare he had momentarily forgotten everything else.

The Controller shrugged his shoulders. “Because it’s old; that’s the chief reason.
We haven’t any use for old things here.”

“Even when they’re beautiful?”

“Particularly when they’re beautiful. Beauty’s attractive, and we don’t want
people to be attracted by old things. We want them to like the new ones.”

“But the new ones are so stupid and horrible. Those plays, where there’s
nothing but helicopters ﬂying about and you feel the people kissing.” He ma-
de a grimace. “Goats and monkeys!” Only in Othello’s word could he ﬁnd an
adequate vehicle for his contempt and hatred.

“Nice tame animals, anyhow,” the Controller murmured parenthetically.

“Why don’t you let them see Othello instead?”

“I’ve told you; it’s old. Besides, they couldn’t understand it.”

Yes, that was true. He remembered how Helmholtz had laughed at Romeo and
Juliet. “Well then,” he said, after a pause, “something new that’s like Othello,
and that they could understand.”

“That’s what we’ve all been wanting to write,” said Helmholtz, breaking a long
silence.

“And it’s what you never will write,” said the Controller. “Because, if it were
really like Othello nobody could understand it, however new it might be. And

http://www.idph.net


IDPH

151

if were new, it couldn’t possibly be like Othello.”

“Why not?”

“Yes, why not?” Helmholtz repeated. He too was forgetting the unpleasant
realities of the situation. Green with anxiety and apprehension, only Bernard
remembered them; the others ignored him. “Why not?”

“Because our world is not the same as Othello’s world. You can’t make ﬂiv-
vers without steel-and you can’t make tragedies without social instability. The
world’s stable now. People are happy; they get what they want, and they never
want what they can’t get. They’re well off; they’re safe; they’re never ill; they’re
not afraid of death; they’re blissfully ignorant of passion and old age; they’re
plagued with no mothers or fathers; they’ve got no wives, or children, or lovers
to feel strongly about; they’re so conditioned that they practically can’t help
behaving as they ought to behave. And if anything should go wrong, there’s
soma. Which you go and chuck out of the window in the name of liberty, Mr.
Savage. Liberty!” He laughed. “Expecting Deltas to know what liberty is! And
now expecting them to understand Othello! My good boy!”

The Savage was silent for a little. “All the same,” he insisted obstinately, “Othel-
lo’s good, Othello’s better than those feelies.”

“Of course it is,” the Controller agreed. “But that’s the price we have to pay for
stability. You’ve got to choose between happiness and what people used to call
high art. We’ve sacriﬁced the high art. We have the feelies and the scent organ
instead.”

“But they don’t mean anything.”

“They mean themselves; they mean a lot of agreeable sensations to the audien-
ce.”

“But they’re. they’re told by an idiot.”

The Controller laughed. “You’re not being very polite to your friend, Mr. Wat-
son. One of our most distinguished Emotional Engineers .”

“But he’s right,” said Helmholtz gloomily. “Because it is idiotic. Writing when
there’s nothing to say .”

“Precisely. But that require the most enormous ingenuity. You’re making ﬁiv-
vers out of the absolute minimum of steel-works of art out of practically nothing
but pure sensation.”

The Savage shook his head. “It all seems to me quite horrible.”

“Of course it does. Actual happiness always looks pretty squalid in compari-
son with the over-compensations for misery. And, of course, stability isn’t ne-

http://www.idph.net


152

IDPH

arly so spectacular as instability. And being contented has none of the glamour
of a good ﬁght against misfortune, none of the picturesqueness of a struggle
with temptation, or a fatal overthrow by passion or doubt. Happiness is never
grand.”

“I suppose not,” said the Savage after a silence. “But need it be quite so bad
as those twins?” He passed his hand over his eyes as though he were trying to
wipe away the remembered image of those long rows of identical midgets at the
assembling tables, those queued-up twin-herds at the entrance to the Brentford
monorail station, those human maggots swarming round Linda’s bed of death,
the endlessly repeated face of his assailants. He looked at his bandaged left
hand and shuddered. “Horrible!”

“But how useful! I see you don’t like our Bokanovsky Groups; but, I assure
you, they’re the foundation on which everything else is built. They’re the gy-
roscope that stabilizes the rocket plane of state on its unswerving course.” The
deep voice thrillingly vibrated; the gesticulating hand implied all space and the
onrush of the irresistible machine. Mustapha Mond’s oratory was almost up to
synthetic standards.

“I was wondering,” said the Savage, “why you had them at all-seeing that you
can get whatever you want out of those bottles. Why don’t you make every-
body an Alpha Double Plus while you’re about it?”

Mustapha Mond laughed. “Because we have no wish to have our throats cut,”
he answered. “We believe in happiness and stability. A society of Alphas
couldn’t fail to be unstable and miserable. Imagine a factory staffed by Alphas-
that is to say by separate and unrelated individuals of good heredity and condi-
tioned so as to be capable (within limits) of making a free choice and assuming
responsibilities. Imagine it!” he repeated.

The Savage tried to imagine it, not very successfully.

“It’s an absurdity. An Alpha-decanted, Alpha-conditioned man would go mad
if he had to do Epsilon Semi-Moron work-go mad, or start smashing things up.
Alphas can be completely socialized-but only on condition that you make them
do Alpha work. Only an Epsilon can be expected to make Epsilon sacriﬁces,
for the good reason that for him they aren’t sacriﬁces; they’re the line of least
resistance. His conditioning has laid down rails along which he’s got to run.
He can’t help himself; he’s foredoomed. Even after decanting, he’s still inside
a bottle-an invisible bottle of infantile and embryonic ﬁxations. Each one of
us, of course,” the Controller meditatively continued, “goes through life inside
a bottle. But if we happen to be Alphas, our bottles are, relatively speaking,
enormous. We should suffer acutely if we were conﬁned in a narrower space.
You cannot pour upper-caste champagne-surrogate into lower-caste bottles. It’s
obvious theoretically. But it has also been proved in actual practice. The result

http://www.idph.net


IDPH

153

of the Cyprus experiment was convincing.”

“What was that?” asked the Savage.

Mustapha Mond smiled. “Well, you can call it an experiment in rebottling if
you like. It began in A.F. 473. The Controllers had the island of Cyprus cle-
ared of all its existing inhabitants and re-colonized with a specially prepared
batch of twenty-two thousand Alphas. All agricultural and industrial equip-
ment was handed over to them and they were left to manage their own affairs.
The result exactly fulﬁlled all the theoretical prediotions. The land wasn’t pro-
perly worked; there were strikes in all the factories; the laws were set at naught,
orders disobeyed; all the people detailed for a spell of low-grade work were
perpetually intriguing for high- grade jobs, and all the people with high-grade
jobs were counter-intriguing at all costs to stay where they were. Within six
years they were having a ﬁrst-class civil war. When nineteen out of the twenty-
two thousand had been killed, the survivors unanimously petitioned the World
Controllers to resume the government of the island. Which they did. And that
was the end of the only society of Alphas that the world has ever seen.”

The Savage sighed, profoundly.

“The optimum population,” said Mustapha Mond, “is modelled on the iceberg-
eight-ninths below the water line, one-ninth above.”

“And they’re happy below the water line?”

“Happier than above it. Happier than your friend here, for example.” He poin-
ted.

“In spite of that awful work?”

“Awful? They don’t ﬁnd it so. On the contrary, they like it. It’s light, it’s chil-
dishly simple. No strain on the mind or the muscles. Seven and a half hours of
mild, unexhausting labour, and then the soma ration and games and unrestric-
ted copulation and the feelies. What more can they ask for? True,” he added,
“they might ask for shorter hours. And of course we could give them shor-
ter hours. Technically, it would be perfectly simple to reduce all lower-caste
working hours to three or four a day. But would they be any the happier for
that? No, they wouldn’t. The experiment was tried, more than a century and
a half ago. The whole of Ireland was put on to the four-hour day. What was
the result? Unrest and a large increase in the consumption of soma; that was
all. Those three and a half hours of extra leisure were so far from being a source
of happiness, that people felt constrained to take a holiday from them. The In-
ventions Ofﬁce is stuffed with plans for labour-saving processes. Thousands of
them.” Mustapha Mond made a lavish gesture. “And why don’t we put them
into execution? For the sake of the labourers; it would be sheer cruelty to afﬂict
them with excessive leisure. It’s the same with agriculture. We could synthesize

http://www.idph.net


154

IDPH

every morsel of food, if we wanted to. But we don’t. We prefer to keep a third
of the population on the land. For their own sakes-because it takes longer to
get food out of the land than out of a factory. Besides, we have our stability to
think of. We don’t want to change. Every change is a menace to stability. That’s
another reason why we’re so chary of applying new inventions. Every disco-
very in pure science is potentially subversive; even science must sometimes be
treated as a possible enemy. Yes, even science.”

Science? The Savage frowned. He knew the word. But what it exactly signi-
ﬁed he could not say. Shakespeare and the old men of the pueblo had never
mentioned science, and from Linda he had only gathered the vaguest hints: sci-
ence was something you made helicopters with, some thing that caused you
to laugh at the Corn Dances, something that prevented you from being wrin-
kled and losing your teeth. He made a desperate effort to take the Controller’s
meaning.

“Yes,” Mustapha Mond was saying, “that’s another item in the cost of stability.
It isn’t only art that’s incompatible with happiness; it’s also science. Science is
dangerous; we have to keep it most carefully chained and muzzled.”

“What?” said Helmholtz, in astonishment. “But we’re always saying that sci-
ence is everything. It’s a hypnopædic platitude.”

“Three times a week between thirteen and seventeen,” put in Bemard.

“And all the science propaganda we do at the College .”

“Yes; but what sort of science?” asked Mustapha Mond sarcastically. “You’ve
had no scientiﬁc training, so you can’t judge. I was a pretty good physicist in
my time. Too good-good enough to realize that all our science is just a cookery
book, with an orthodox theory of cooking that nobody’s allowed to question,
and a list of recipes that mustn’t be added to except by special permission from
the head cook. I’m the head cook now. But I was an inquisitive young scullion
once. I started doing a bit of cooking on my own. Unorthodox cooking, illicit
cooking. A bit of real science, in fact.” He was silent.

“What happened?” asked Helmholtz Watson.

The Controller sighed. “Very nearly what’s going to happen to you young men.
I was on the point of being sent to an island.”

The words galvanized Bernard into violent and unseemly activity. “Send me
to an island?” He jumped up, ran across the room, and stood gesticulating in
front of the Controller. “You can’t send me. I haven’t done anything. lt was
the others.
I swear it was the others.” He pointed accusingly to Helmholtz
and the Savage. “Oh, please don’t send me to Iceland. I promise I’ll do what
I ought to do. Give me another chance. Please give me another chance.” The

http://www.idph.net


IDPH

155

tears began to ﬂow. “I tell you, it’s their fault,” he sobbed. “And not to Iceland.
Oh please, your fordship, please .” And in a paroxysm of abjection he threw
himself on his knees before the Controller. Mustapha Mond tried to make him
get up; but Bernard persisted in his grovelling; the stream of words poured out
inexhaustibly. In the end the Controller had to ring for his fourth secretary.

“Bring three men,” he ordered, “and take Mr. Marx into a bedroom. Give him
a good soma vaporization and then put him to bed and leave him.”

The fourth secretary went out and returned with three green-uniformed twin
footmen. Still shouting and sobbing. Bernard was carried out.

“One would think he was going to have his throat cut,” said the Controller, as
the door closed. “Whereas, if he had the smallest sense, he’d understand that
his punishment is really a reward. He’s being sent to an island. That’s to say,
he’s being sent to a place where he’ll meet the most interesting set of men and
women to be found anywhere in the world. All the people who, for one reason
or another, have got too self-consciously individual to ﬁt into community-life.
All the people who aren’t satisﬁed with orthodoxy, who’ve got independent
ideas of their own. Every one, in a word, who’s any one. I almost envy you, Mr.
Watson.”

Helmholtz laughed. “Then why aren’t you on an island yourself?”

“Because, ﬁnally, I preferred this,” the Controller answered. “I was given the
choice: to be sent to an island, where I could have got on with my pure science,
or to be taken on to the Controllers’ Council with the prospect of succeeding in
due course to an actual Controllership. I chose this and let the science go.” After
a little silence, “Sometimes,” he added, “I rather regret the science. Happiness
is a hard master-particularly other people’s happiness. A much harder master,
if one isn’t conditioned to accept it unquestioningly, than truth.” He sighed,
fell silent again, then continued in a brisker tone, “Well, duty’s duty. One can’t
consult one’s own preference. I’m interested in truth, I like science. But truth’s
a menace, science is a public danger. As dangerous as it’s been beneﬁcent. It
has given us the stablest equilibrium in history. China’s was hopelessly inse-
cure by comparison; even the primitive matriarchies weren’t steadier than we
are. Thanks, l repeat, to science. But we can’t allow science to undo its own
good work. That’s why we so carefully limit the scope of its researches-that’s
why I almost got sent to an island. We don’t allow it to deal with any but the
most immediate problems of the moment. All other enquiries are most sedu-
lously discouraged. It’s curious,” he went on after a little pause, “to read what
people in the time of Our Ford used to write about scientiﬁc progress. They
seemed to have imagined that it could be allowed to go on indeﬁnitely, regar-
dless of everything else. Knowledge was the highest good, truth the supreme
value; all the rest was secondary and subordinate. True, ideas were beginning

http://www.idph.net


156

IDPH

to change even then. Our Ford himself did a great deal to shift the emphasis
from truth and beauty to comfort and happiness. Mass production demanded
the shift. Universal happiness keeps the wheels steadily turning; truth and be-
auty can’t. And, of course, whenever the masses seized political power, then
it was happiness rather than truth and beauty that mattered. Still, in spite of
everytung, unrestricted scientiﬁc research was still permitted. People still went
on talking about truth and beauty as though they were the sovereign goods.
Right up to the time of the Nine Years’ War. That made them change their tune
all right. What’s the point of truth or beauty or knowledge when the anthrax
bombs are popping all around you? That was when science ﬁrst began to be
controlled-after the Nine Years’ War. People were ready to have even their ap-
petites controlled then. Anything for a quiet life. We’ve gone on controlling
ever since. It hasn’t been very good for truth, of course. But it’s been very good
for happiness. One can’t have something for nothing. Happiness has got to be
paid for. You’re paying for it, Mr. Watson-paying because you happen to be too
much interested in beauty. I was too much interested in truth; I paid too.”

“But you didn’t go to an island,” said the Savage, breaking a long silence.

The Controller smiled. “That’s how I paid. By choosing to serve happiness.
Other people’s-not mine. It’s lucky,” he added, after a pause, “that there are
such a lot of islands in the world. I don’t know what we should do without
them. Put you all in the lethal chamber, I suppose. By the way, Mr. Watson,
would you like a tropical climate? The Marquesas, for example; or Samoa? Or
something rather more bracing?”

Helmholtz rose from his pneumatic chair. “I should like a thoroughly bad cli-
mate,” he answered. “I believe one would write better if the climate were bad.
If there were a lot of wind and storms, for example .”

The Controller nodded his approbation. “I like your spirit, Mr. Watson. I like it
very much indeed. As much as I ofﬁcially disapprove of it.” He smiled. “What
about the Falkland Islands?”

“Yes, I think that will do,” Helmholtz answered. “And now, if you don’t mind,
I’ll go and see how poor Bernard’s getting on.”

http://www.idph.net

=== When We Die ===

Copyright protected

Copyright protected

1

2

Life after death: the science of human
decomposition

Far from being dead, a rotting human corpse is the cornerstone of a complex ecosystem. A
better understanding of this ecosystem could have direct applications in forensic science

https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/may/05/life-after-death

by Mo Costandi

John had been dead about four hours before his body was brought into the funeral home. He
had been relatively healthy for most of his life. He had worked his whole life on the Texas oil
fields, a job that kept him physically active, and in pretty good shape. He had stopped
smoking decades earlier, and drank moderate amounts of alcohol.

Lately, his family and friends had noticed that his health and his mind had started to falter.
Then, one cold January morning, he suffered a massive heart attack, apparently triggered by
other, unknown, complications, fell to the floor at home, and died almost immediately. He
was just 57 years old. Now, he lay on the metal table, his body wrapped in a white linen sheet,
cold and stiff to the touch, his skin purplish-grey
decomposition were well under way.

tell-tale signs that the early stages of

Most of us would rather not think about what happens to our selves and loved ones after
death. Most of us die natural deaths and, at least in the West, are given a traditional burial.
This is a way of showing respect to the deceased, and of bringing a sense of closure to
bereaved family. It also serves to slow down the decomposition process, so that family
members can remember their loved one as they once were, rather than as they now are.

For others, the end is less dignified. A murderer might bury his victim in a shallow grave, or
leave their body at the scene of the crime, exposed to the elements. When the body is
eventually discovered, the first thing that the police detectives and forensics experts working
on the case will try to establish is when death occurred. Time of death is a crucial piece of
information in any murder investigation, but the many factors influencing the decomposition
process can make it extremely difficult to estimate.

The sight of a rotting corpse is, for most of us, unsettling at best, and repulsive and
frightening at worst, the stuff of nightmares.

Far

scientists view a rotting corpse as the cornerstone of a vast and complex ecosystem, which
emerges soon after death and flourishes and evolves as decomposition proceeds.

We still know very little about human decay, but the growth of forensic research facilities, or

-decreasing cost of techniques such as

DNA sequencing, now enables researchers to study the process in ways that were not possible
just a few years ago. A better understanding of the cadaveric ecosystem
 how it changes over
time, and how it interacts with and alters the ecology of its wider environment could have

important applications in forensic science. It could, for example, lead to new, more accurate
ways of estimating time of death, and of finding bodies that have been hidden in clandestine
graves.

Decomposition begins several minutes after death, with a process called autolysis, or self-
digestion. Soon after the heart stops beating, cells become deprived of oxygen, and their
acidity increases as the toxic by-products of chemical reactions begin to accumulate inside
them. Enzymes start to digest cell membranes and then leak out as the cells break down. This
usually begins in the liver, which is enriched in enzymes, and in the brain, which has high
water content; eventually, though, all other tissues and organs begin to break down in this
way. Damaged blood cells spill out of broken vessels and, aided by gravity, settle in the
capillaries and small veins, discolouring the skin.

the stiffness of death sets in, starting in the eyelids, jaw and neck muscles, before

Body temperature also begins to drop, until it has acclimatised to its surroundings. Then, rigor
mortis
working its way into the trunk and then the limbs. In life, muscle cells contracts and relax due
to the actions of two filamentous proteins, called actin and myosin, which slide along each
other. After death, the cells are depleted of their energy source, and the protein filaments
become locked in place. This causes the muscles to become rigid, and locks the joints.

tician Holly Williams, lifting

Williams speaks softly and has a happy-go-lucky demeanour that belies the gruesome nature
of her work. Having been raised in a family-run funeral home in north Texas, and worked
there all her life, she has seen and handled dead bodies on an almost daily basis since her
childhood. Now 28 years old, she estimates that she has worked on something like 1,000
bodies.

Her work involves collecting recently deceased bodies from the Dallas-Fort Worth area, and
sometimes beyond, and preparing them for their funeral, by washing and embalming them.
Embalming involves treating the body with chemicals that slow down the decomposition
process, primarily to restore it as closely as possible to its natural state before death. Williams
performs this so that family and friends can view their departed loved one at the funeral.
Victims of trauma and violent deaths usually need extensive facial reconstruction, a highly
skilled and time-consuming task.

people who died of gunshot wounds or in a car-wreck. We might get a call to pick up

During the early stages of decomposition, the cadaveric ecosystem consists mostly of the
bacteria that live in and on the human body. Our bodies host huge numbers of bacteria, with
every one of its surfaces and corners providing a habitat for a specialised microbial
community. By far the largest of these communities resides in the gut, which is home to
trillions of bacteria of hundreds or perhaps thousands of different species.

The so-called gut microbiome is one of the hottest research topics in biology at the moment.
Some researchers are convinced that gut bacteria play essential roles in human health and




Copyright protected

Copyright protected

3

4

disease, but we still know very little about our make-up of these mysterious microbial
passengers, let alone about how they might influence our bodily functions.

which organ is best for estimating [time of death]

-generation sequencing and bioinformatics to see

We know even less about what happens to the microbiome after a person dies, but pioneering
research published in the past few years has provided some much needed details.

One thing that already seems clear, though, is that different stages of decomposition are
associated with a different composition of cadaver bacteria.

Most internal organs are devoid of microbes when we are alive. Soon after death, however,
the immune system stops working, leaving them to spread throughout the body freely. This
usually begins in the gut, at the junction between the small and large intestines. Left
unchecked, our gut bacteria begin to digest the intestines, and then the surrounding tissues,
from the inside out, using the chemical cocktail that leaks out of damaged cells as a food
source. Then they invade the capillaries of the digestive system and lymph nodes, spreading
first to the liver and spleen, then into the heart and brain.

Last year, forensic scientist Gulnaz Javan of Alabama State University in Montgomery and
her colleagues published the very first study of what they have called the thanatomicrobiome
(from thanatos

Javan and her team took samples of liver, spleen, brain, heart, and blood from 11 cadavers, at
between 20 and 240 hours after death, then used two different state-of-the-art DNA
sequencing technologies, combined with bioinformatics, to analyse and compare the bacterial
content of each sample.

They found that samples taken from different organs in the same cadaver were very similar to
each other, but were very different from those taken from the same organs in other bodies.
This may be due partly to individual differences in the composition of the microbiome of the
individuals involved in the study.

The variations may also be related to differences in the period of time that had elapsed since
death. An earlier study of decomposing mice
microbiome changes dramatically after death, it does so in a consistent and measurable way,
such that the researchers were able to estimate time of death to within 3 days of a nearly 2-
month period.

human body, too. The first bacteria they detected came from a sample of liver tissue obtained
from a cadaver just 20 hours after death, but the earliest time at which bacteria were found in
all samples from the same cadaver was 58 hours after death. Thus, after we die, our bacteria
may spread through the body in a stereotyped way, and the timing with which they infiltrate
first one internal organ and then another may provide a new way of estimating the amount of
time that has elapsed since death.

ndividual but also differs in

Javan and her colleagues secured a US$200,000 grant from the National Science Foundation

Once self-digestion is under way and bacteria have started to escape from the gastrointestinal
tract, putrefaction begins. This is molecular death
further, into gases, liquids and salts. It is already under way at the earlier stages of
decomposition, but really gets going when anaerobic bacteria get in on the act.

the break down of soft tissues even

Putrefaction is associated with a marked shift from aerobic bacterial species, which require
oxygen to grow, to anaerobic ones, which do not. These then feed on the body tissues,
fermenting the sugars in them to produce gaseous by-products such as methane, hydrogen
sulphide and ammonia, which
abdomen and sometimes other body parts, too.

This causes further discoloration of the body. As damaged blood cells continue to leak from
disintegrating vessels, anaerobic convert haemoglobin molecules, which once carried oxygen
around the body, into sulfhaemoglobin. The presence of this molecule in settled blood gives
skin the marbled, greenish-black appearance characteristic of a body undergoing active
decomposition.

As the gas pressure continues to build up inside the body, it causes blisters to appear all over

remain barely attached to the deteriorating frame underneath. Eventually, the gases and
liquefied tissues purge from the body, usually leaking from the anus and other orifices, and
often also from ripped skin in other parts of the body. Sometimes, the pressure is so great that
the abdomen bursts open.

Bloating is often used a marker for the transition between early and later stages of
decomposition, and another recent study shows that this transition is characterised by a
distinct shift in the composition of cadaveric bacteria.

The study was carried out at the Southeast Texas Applied Forensic Science Facility in
Huntsville. Opened in 2009, the facility is located within a 247-acre area of National Forest,
which is owned by the university and maintained by researchers at Sam Houston State
University (SHSU). Within, a nine-acre plot of densely wooded land has been sealed off from
the wider area, and further subdivided, by 10-foot-high green wire fences topped with barbed
wire.

Here, scattered among the pine trees, are about a half dozen human cadavers, in various stages
of decay. The two most recently placed bodies lay spread-eagled near the centre of the small
enclosure, with much of their loose, grey-blue mottled skin still intact, their rib cages and
pelvic bones visible between slowly putrefying flesh. A few meters away lies another cadaver,
fully skeletonized, with its black, hardened skin clinging to the bones, as if it were wearing a
shiny latex suit and skullcap. Further still, beyond other skeletal remains that had obviously
been scattered by vultures, lay another, within a wood and wire cage, this one nearing the end
of the death cycle, partly mummified and with several large, brown mushrooms growing from
where an abdomen once was.




Copyright protected

Copyright protected

5

6

In late 2011, SHSU researchers Sibyl Bucheli and Aaron Lynne and their colleagues placed
two fresh cadavers here, left them to decay under natural conditions, and then took samples of
bacteria from their various parts, at the beginning and the end of the bloat stage. They then
extracted bacterial DNA from the samples, and sequenced it to find that bloating is
characterised by a marked shift from aerobic to anaerobic species.

As an entomologist, Bucheli is mainly interested in the insects that colonise cadavers. She

species, some of which see out their entire life cycle in, on and around the body.

-

When a decomposing body starts to purge, it becomes fully exposed to its surroundings. At
this stage, microbial and insect activity reaches its peak, and the cadaveric ecosystem really
comes into its
and scavengers, as well as meat-eating animals.

Two species closely linked with decomposition are blowflies, flesh flies and their larvae.
Cadavers give off a foul, sickly-sweet odour, made up of a complex cocktail of volatile
compounds, whose ingredients change as decomposition progresses. Blowflies detect the
smell using specialised smell receptors, then land on the cadaver and lay its eggs in orifices
and open wounds.

Each fly deposits around 250 eggs, that hatch within 24 hours, giving rise to small first-stage
maggots. These feed on the rotting flesh and then molt into larger maggots, which feed for
several hours before molting again. After feeding some more, these yet larger, and now
fattened, maggots wriggle away from the body. Then they pupate and transform into adult

Under the right conditions, an actively decaying body will have large numbers of stage-three

temperature by more than 10°C. Like penguins huddling, individual maggots within the mass
are constantly on the move. But whereas penguins huddle to keep warm, maggots in the mass
move around to stay cool.

Back in her office on the SHSU campus decorated with large toy insects and a collection of
Monster High dolls

 Bucheli explains:

-edged sword

The presence of blowflies attracts predators such as skin beetles, mites, ants, wasps, and
spiders, to the cadaver, which then feed on or parasitize their eggs and larvae. Vultures and
other scavengers, as well as other, large meat-eating animals, may also descend upon the
body.

In the absence of scavengers though, it is the maggots that are responsible for removal of the
soft tissues. Carl Linnaeus, who devised the system by which scientists name species, noted in

Given the paucity of human decomposition research, we still know very little about the insect
species that colonise a cadaver. But the latest published study
they are far more diverse than we had previously imagined.

cadavers on the Huntsville body farm in 2009, and left them out for a whole year, during
which time she returned four times a day to collect the insects that she found on them. The
usual suspects were present, but Lindgren also noted four unusual insect-cadaver interactions
that had never been documented before, including a scorpionfly that was found feeding on
brain fluids through an autopsy wound in the scalp, and a worm found feeding on the dried
skin around where the toenails had been, which was previously only known to feed on
decaying wood.

Insects colonise a cadaver in successive waves, and each has its own unique life cycle. They
can therefore provide information that is useful for estimating time of death, and for learning
about the circumstances of death. This has led to the emerging field of forensic entomology.

Insects can be useful for estimating time of death of a badly decomposing body. In theory, an
ento
estimate the time of death. And, because many insect species have a limited geographical
distribution, the presence of a given species can link a body to a certain location, or show that
it has been moved from one place to another.

In practice, though, using insects to estimate time of death is fraught with difficulties. Time of
death estimates based on the age of blowfly maggots found on a body are based on the
assumption that flies colonised the cadaver right after death, but this is not always the case
burial can exclude insects altogether, for example, and extreme temperatures inhibit their
growth or prevent it altogether.

An earlier study led by Lindgren revealed another unusual way by which blowflies might be

-mortem wound to the stomach [of

a donated body] then partially buried the cadaver in a shallow

sponges out. The body began to bloat then it blew up, and at that point the flies could colonise

inaccurate for another reason. Insects are cold-blooded, and so their growth rate occurs
relative

-

of the

maggots will move away from a cadaver in large numbers, often following the same route.
Their activity is so rigorous that their migration paths may be seen after decomposition is
finished, as deep furrows in the soil emanating from the cadaver.

If not, time of death estimates based on information about insect colonization can be wildly
inaccurate and misleading. Eventually, though, Bucheli believes that combining insect data

-stage

average hourly temperature], so if you know the temperature and the growth cycle of a fly,




Copyright protected

Copyright protected

7

8

with microbiology could help to make the estimates more accurate, and possibly provide other
valuable information about the circumstances of death.

Every species that visits a cadaver has a unique repertoire of gut microbes, and different types
of soil are likely to harbour distinct bacterial communities, the composition of which is
probably determined by factors such as temperature, moisture, and the soil type and texture.

All these microbes mingle and mix within the cadaveric ecosystem. Flies that land on the
cadaver will not only deposit their eggs on it, but will also take up some of the bacteria they
find there, and leave some of their own. And the liquefied tissues seeping out of the body
allow for the exchange of bacteria between the cadaver and the soil beneath.

When they take samples from cadavers, Bucheli and Lynne detect bacteria originating from
the skin on the body and from the flies and scavengers that visit it, as well as from soil.

Lindgren and Bucheli found a scorpionfly, Panorpa nuptialis, feeding on brain fluids through
an autopsy incision. Photograph: Natalie Lindgren

Thus, every dead body is likely have a unique microbiological signature, and this signature
may change with time according to the exacting conditions of the death scene. A better
understanding of the composition of these bacterial communities, the relationships between
them, and how they influence each other as decomposition proceeds, could one day help
forensics teams learn more about where, when and how a person died.

For instance, detecting DNA sequences known to be unique to a particular organism or soil
type in a cadaver could help crime scene investigators link the body of a murder victim to a
particular geographical location, or narrow down their search for clues even further, perhaps
to a specific field within a given area.

t cases where forensic entomology has really stood up and

information and could become another tool to refine [time of death] estimates. I hope that in
about 5 years

To this end, more knowledge about the human microbiome and how it changes across a

cataloguing the bacterial species in and on the human body, and studying how bacterial

 and after they have died will be crucial. Researchers are busy

A decomposing body significantly alters the chemistry of the soil beneath, causing changes
that may persist for years. Purging releases nutrients into the underlying soil, and maggot
migration transfers much of the energy in a body to the wider environment. Eventually, the

organically rich soil. As well as releasing nutrients into the wider ecosystem, the cadaver also
attracts other organic materials, such as dead insects and faecal matter from larger animals.

According to one estimate, an average human body consists of 50-75% and every kilogram of
dry body mass eventually releases 32g of nitrogen, 10g of phosphorous, 4g of potassium, and
1g of magnesium into the soil. Initially, some of the underlying and surrounding vegetation
dies off, possibly because of nitrogen toxicity, or because of antibiotics found in the body,
which are secreted by insect larvae as they feed on the flesh.

Ultimately, though, decomposition is beneficial for the ecosystem
within the cadaver decomposition island is greater than in other nearby areas; nematode
worms also become more abundant, and plant life more diverse. Further research into how
decomposing bodies alter the ecology of their surroundings may provide a new way of finding
murder victims whose bodies have been buried in shallow graves.

the microbial biomass

about flying drones over crop fields to see which ones would be best
Daniel Wescott, director of the Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State

-infrared and showed organically

An anthropologist specialising in skull structure, Wescott collaborates with entomologists and
microbiologists to learn more about decomposition. Among his collaborators is Javan, who
has been busy analysing samples of cadaver soil collected from the facility in San Marcos.

Lately, Wescott has started using a micro-CT scanner to analyse the microscopic structure of
the bones that are brought back to the lab from the San Marcos body farm. He also works with
computer engineers and a pilot who operates a drone and uses it to take aerial photographs of
the facility.

thought if farmers can spot organically rich fields, then maybe our little drone will pick up the

Furthermore, grave soil analysis may eventually provide another possible way of estimating
time of death. A 2008 study of the biochemical changes that take place in a cadaver
decomposition island showed that the soil concentration of lipid-phosphorous leaking from a
cadaver peaks at around 40 days after death, whereas those of nitrogen and extractable
phosphorous peak at 72 and 100 days, respectively. With a more detailed understanding of
these processes, analyses of grave soil biochemistry could one day help forensic researchers
to estimate how long ago a body was placed in a hidden grave.

Another reason why estimating time of death can be extremely difficult is because the stages
of decomposition do not occur discretely, but often overlap, with several taking place
simultaneously, and because the rate at which it proceeds can vary widely, depending largely
on temperature. Once maggot migration has ended, the cadaver enters the last stages of decay,
with just the bones, and perhaps some skin, remain. These final stages of decomposition, and
the transition between them, are difficult to identify, because there are far fewer observable
changes than at earlier stages.

In the relentless dry heat of the Texas summer, a body left to the elements will mummify
rather than decompose fully. The skin will quickly lose all of its moisture, so that it remains
clinging to the bones when the process is complete.




Copyright protected

Copyright protected

9

10

Once all
the fluids out of the body cavity, together with any urine and faeces that might still be in
there. Finally, she sews up the incisions, wipes the body down a second time, sets the facial
features, and re-dresses it. John is now ready for his funeral.

Embalmed bodies eventually decompose too, but exactly when, and how long it takes,
depends largely on how the embalming was done, the type of casket in which the body is
placed, and how it is buried. Bodies are, after all, merely forms of energy, trapped in lumps of
matter waiting to be released into the wider universe. In life, our bodies expend energy
keeping their countless atoms locked in highly organized configurations, staying composed.

According to the laws of thermodynamics, energy cannot be created or destroyed, only
converted from one form to another, and the amount of free energy always increases. In other
words, things fall apart, converting their mass to energy while doing so. Decomposition is one
final, morbid reminder that all matter in the universe must follow these fundamental laws. It
breaks us down, equilibrating our bodily matter with its surroundings, and recycling it so that
other living things can put it to use.

Ashes to ashes, dust to dust.

The speed of the chemical reactions involved doubles with every 10°C rise in temperature, so
a cadaver will reach the advanced stage after 16 days at an average daily temperature of 25°C,
and after 80 days at an average daily temperature of 5°C.

The ancient Egyptians knew this. In the pre-dynastic period, they wrapped their dead in linen
and buried them directly in the sand. The heat inhibited the activity of microbes, while burial
prevented insects from reaching the bodies, and so they were extremely well preserved. Later
on, they began building increasingly elaborate tombs for the dead, in order to provide even
better for their afterlife, but this had the opposite of the intended effect, hastening the
decomposition process, and so they invented embalming and mummification.

Morticians study the ancient Egyptian embalming method to this day. The embalmer would
first wash the body of the deceased with palm wine and Nile water, remove most of the
internal organs through an incision made down the left-hand side, and pack them with natron,
a naturally-occurring salt mixture found throughout the Nile valley. He would use a long hook
to pull the brain out through the nostrils, then cover the entire with body with natron, and
leave it to dry for forty days.

Initially, the dried organs were placed into canopic jars that were buried alongside the body;
later, they were wrapped in linen and returned to the body. Finally, the body itself was
wrapped in multiple layers of linen, in preparation for burial.

Living in a small town, Williams has worked on many people she knew, or even grew up with

friends who overdosed, committed suicide, or died texting at the wheel. And when her
mother died four years ago, Williams did some work on her, too, adding the final touches by

-up when she was alive, so I knew how to

She transfers John to the prep table, removes his clothes and positions him, then takes several
small bottles of embalming fluid from a wall cupboard. The fluid contains a mixture of

linking cellular
prevents them from breaking down the proteins and using them as a food source.

of colours, each matching a different skin tone. Williams wipes the body with a wet sponge

and subclavian vein from the neck, ties them off with pieces of string, then pushes a cannula
into the artery and small tweezers into the vein to open up the vessels.

Bodies are, after all, merely forms of energy, trapped in lumps of matter waiting to be
released into the wider universe

Next, she switches the machine on, pumping embalming fluid into the carotid artery and
around the body. As the fluid goes in, blood pours out of the incision, flowing down along the
guttered edges of the sloped metal table and into a large sink. Meanwhile, she picks up one of
his limbs to massa
average-

=== Judith Jarvis Thomson — A Defence of Abortion ===

ADEFENSE OF ABORTION — 107
they think the step too simple and obyious to require much com-
1 4 ment. ... Whatever the explanation, I suggest that the step they
CHAPTER take is neither easy nor obvious, that it calls for closer examination
— than it is commonly given, and that when we do give it this closer
examination we shall feel inclined to reject it.
>, I propose, then, that we grant that the fetus is a person from
A Defense of Abortion the moment of conception. How does the argument wo from here?
- . Something like this, I take it. Every person has a right to life. So the
Judith Jarvis Thomson fetus has a right to life. No doubt the mother has a right to decide
— eee what shall happen in and to her body; everyone would grant that
But surely a person’s right to life is stronger and more stringent
than the mother’s right to decide what happens in and to her body,
For the sake of argument, Judith Jarvis Thomson grants that a fetus and so outweighs it. So the fetus may not be killed; an abortion may
is a person, with a right to life, from the moment of conception. Can not be performed.
we conclude from that assumption that abortion is immoral? The It sounds plausible, But now let me ask you to imagine this.
answer tums out to be surprisingly complicated. Thomson's discus- You wake up in the morning and find yourself back to back in bed
sion not only throws light on the abortion issue, but also illuminates with an unconscious violinist. A famous unconscious violinist. He has
the nature of rights been found to have a fatal kidney ailment, and the Society of Music
Readers of this essay who are unfamiliar with Henry Fonda may Lovers has canvassed all the available medical records and found
instead think of Channing Tatum, George Clooney, or Justin Timberlake. that you alone have the right blood type to help. They have there-
The philosophical point involving Fonda will be the same. fore kidnapped you, and last night the violinist’s circulatory system
Judith Jarvis Thomson is Professor Emerita at the Massachusetts was plugged into yours, so that your kidneys can be used to extract
Institute of ‘Technology (MIT) poisons from his blood as well as your own. The director of the hos-
Oe pital now tells you, “Look, we're sorry the Society of Music Lovers
did this to you—we would never have permitted it if we had known.
But still, they did it, and the violinist now is plugged into you. To
Most opposition to abortion relies on the premise that the fetus is a unplug you would be to kill him, But never mind, it’s only for nine
human being, a person, from the moment of conception. . . . months. By then he will have recovered from his ailment, and can
.. I think that the premise is false, that the fetus is not a safely be unplugged from you.” Is it morally incumbent on you to
person from the moment of conception. A newly fertilized ovum, a accede to this situation? No doubt it would be very nice of you if
newly implanted clump of cells, is no more a person than an acorn, you did, a great kindness. But do you have to accede to it? What if
is an oak tee. But I shall not discuss any of this. For it seems to it were not nine months, but nine years? Or longer still? What if the
me to be of great interest to ask what happens if, for the sake of director of the hospital says, “Tough luck, I agree, but you've now
argument, we allow the premise. How, precisely, are we supposed to got to stay in bed, with the violinist plugged into you, for the rest
get from there to the conclusion that abortion is morally impermis- of your life. Because remember this. All persons have a right to life,
sible? Opponents of abortion commonly spend most of their time and violinists are persons. Granted you have a right to decide what
establishing that the fetus is a person, and hardly any time explain- happens in and to your body, but a person’s right to life outweighs
ing the step from there to the impermissibility of abortion. Perhaps your right to decide what happens in and to your body. So you can-
not ever be unplugged from him.” | imagine you would regard this
From Philsoply and Public Aff, vol 1, wo. 1 (Autumn 1971), pp. 47-66. Reprinted as outrageous, which suggests that something really is wrong with that
by permission, plausible-sounding argument I mentioned a moment ago.
106
108 THE RIGHT THING TO DO ADEFENSE OF ABORTION — 109
In this case, of course, you were kidnapped; you didn’t yolun- The most familiar argument here is the following. We are told
teer for the operation that plugged the violinist into your kidneys. that performing the abortion would be directly killing the child,
Can those who oppose abortion on the ground I mentioned make whereas doing nothing would not be killing the mother, but only
an exception for a pregnancy due to rape? Certainly. They can say letting her die. Moreover, in killing the child, one would be killing
that persons have a right to life only if they didn’t come into exis- an innocent person, for the child has committed no crime, and is
tence because of rape; or they can say that all persons have a right not aiming at his mother’s death. And then there are a variety of
to life, but that some have less of a right to life than others, in ways in which this might be continued. (1) But as directly killing
particular, that those who came into existence because of rape have an innocent person is always and absolutely impermissible, an abor-
less. But these statements have a rather unpleasant sound. Surely the tion may not be performed. Or, (2) as directly killing an innocent
question of whether you have a right to life at all, or how much of it person is murder, and murder is always and absolutely impermis-
you have, shouldn't turn on the question of whether or not you are sible, an abortion may not be performed. Or, (3) as one’s duty to
the product of a rape. And in fact the people who oppose abortion refrain from directly killing an innocent person is more stringent
on the ground I mentioned do not make this distinction, and hence than one’s duty to keep a person from dying, an abortion may not
do not make an exception in case of rape. be performed. Or, (4) if one’s only options are directly killing an
Nor do they make an exception for a case in which the mother innocent person or letting a person die, one must prefer letting the
has to spend the nine months of her pregnancy in bed. They would person die, and thus an abortion may not be performed.
agree that would be a great pity, and hard on the mother; but all Some people seem to have thought that these are not further
the same, all persons have a right to life, the fetus is a person, and premises which must be added if the conclusion is to be reached,
so on. I suspect, in fact, that they would not make an exception for but that they follow from the very fact that an innocent person has a
a case in which, miraculously enough, the pregnancy went on for right to life. But this seems to me to be a mistake, and perhaps the
nine years, or even the rest of the mother’s life. simplest way to show this is o bring out that while we must certainly
Some won't even make an exception for a case in which con- grant that innocent persons have a right to life, the theses in (1)
tinuation of the pregnancy is likely to shorten the mother's life; through (4) are all false. Take (2), for example. If directly killing
they regard abortion as impermissible even to save the mother's life. an innocent person is murder, and thus is impermissible, then the
Such cases are nowadays very rare, and many opponents of abortion mother’s directly killing the innocent person inside her is murder,
do not accept this extreme view. All the same, it is a good place to and thus is impermissible. But it cannot seriously be thought to be
begin: a number of points of interest come out in respect to it. murder if the mother performs an abortion on herself to save her
1. Let us call the view that abortion is impermissible even to life. It cannot seriously be said that she must refrain, that she must
save the mother's life “the extreme view.” I want to suggest first that sit passively by and wait for her death. Let us look again at the case
it does not issue from the argument I mentioned earlier without the of you and the violinist. There you are, in bed with the violinist, and
addition of some fairly powerful premises. Suppose a woman has the director of the hospital says to you, “It’s all most distressing, and
become pregnant, and now learns that she has a cardiac condition I deeply sympathize, but you see this is putting an additional strain
such that she will die if she carries the baby to term, What may be ‘on your kidneys, and you'll be dead within the month. But you have
done for her? The fetus, being a person, has a right to life, but as to stay where you are all the same. Because unplugging you would
the mother isa person too, so has she a right to life. Presumably they be directly killing an innocent violinist, and that’s murder, and that's
have an equal right to life. How is it supposed to come out that an impermissible.” If anything in the world is true, it is that you do not
abortion may not be performed? If mother and child have an equal commit murder, you do not do what is impermissible, if you reach
right to life, shouldn't we perhaps flip a coin? Or should we add to around to your back and unplug yourself from that violinist to save
the mother's right to life her right to decide what happens in and your life.
to her body, which everybody seems to be ready to grant—the sum The main focus of attention in writings on abortion has been
of her rights now outweighing the fetus’ right to life? ‘on what a third party may or may not do in answer to a request from
110 THE RIGHT THING TO DO DEFENSE OF ABORTION 111
a woman for an abortion. This is in a way understandable. Things 2. The extreme view could of course be weakened to say that
being as they are, there isn't much a woman can safely do to abort while abortion is permissible to save the mother's life, it may not
herself, So the question asked is what a third party may do, and what be performed by a third party, but only by the mother herself. But
the mother may do, if it is mentioned at all, is deduced, almost as an this cannot be right either, For what we have to keep in mind is
afterthought, from what it is concluded that third parties may do. But that the mother and the unborn child are not like two tenants in
it scems to me that to treat the matter in this way is to refuse to grant a small house which has, by an unfortunate mistake, been rented
to the mother that very status of person which is so firmly insisted on to both: the mother owns the house. The fact that she does adds
for the fetus. For we cannot simply read off what a person may do to the offensiveness of deducing that the mother can do nothing
from what a third party may do. Suppose you find yourself trapped from the supposition that third parties can do nothing. But it does
in a tiny house with a growing child, I mean a very tiny house, and more than this: it casts a bright light on the supposition that third
a rapidly growing child—you are already up against the wall of the parties can do nothing. Certainly it lets us see that a third party who
house and in a few minutes you'll be crushed to death. The child on says “I cannot choose between you" is fooling himself if he thinks
the other hand won't be crushed to death; if nothing is done to stop this is impartiality. If Jones has found and fastened on a certain coat,
him from growing he'll be hurt, but in the end he'll simply burst which he needs to keep him from freezing, but which Smith also
open the house and walk out a free man. Now I could well under- needs to keep him from freezing, then it is not impartiality that says
stand it if a bystander were to say, “There’s nothing we can do for “I cannot choose between you” when Smith owns the coat. Women
you. We cannot choose between your life and his, we cannot be the have said again and again “This body is my body!" and they have
ones to decide who is to live, we cannot intervene.” But it cannot be reason to feel angry, reason to feel that it has been like shouting
concluded that you too can do nothing, that you cannot attack it to into the wind. Smith, after all, is hardly likely to bless us if we say
save your life. However innocent the child may be, you do not have to him, “Of course it’s your coat, anybody would grant that it is. But
to wait passively while it crushes you to death. Perhaps a pregnant no one may choose between you and Jones who is to have it”...
woman is vaguely felt to have the status of house, to which we don’t I suppose that in some views of human life the mother’s body
allow the right of self-defense. But if the woman houses the child, it is only on loan to her, the loan not being one which gives her
should be remembered that she is a person who houses it. any prior claim to it, One who held this view might well think it
I should perhaps stop to say explicitly that I am not claiming impartiality to say “I cannot choose.” But I shall simply ignore this
that people have a right to do anything whatever to save their lives. I possibility. My own view is that if a human being has any just, prior
think, rather, that there are drastic limits to the right of self-defense. claim to anything at all, he has a just, prior claim to his own body.
If someone threatens you with death unless you torture someone else And perhaps this needn't be argued for here anyway, since, as T
to death, I think you have not the right, even to save your life, to do mentioned, the arguments against abortion we are looking at do
so. But the case under consideration here is very different. In our grant that the woman has a right to decide what happens in and
case there are only two people involved, one whose life is threatened, to her body.
and one who threatens it. Both are innocent: the one who is threat- But although they do grant it, I have tried to show that they
ened is not threatened because of any fault, the one who threatens do not take seriously what is done in granting it. I suggest the same
does not threaten because of any fault, For this reason we may feel thing will reappear even more clearly when we turn away from cases
that we bystanders cannot intervene. But the person threatened can. in which the mother’s life is at stake, and attend, as I propose
In sum, a woman surely can defend her life against the threat we now do, to the vastly more common cases in which a woman
to it posed by the unborn child, even if doing so involves its death. wants an abortion for some less weighty reason than preserving her
And this shows not merely that the theses in (1) through (4) are own life.
false; it shows also that the extreme view of abortion is false, and so 3. Where the mother's life is not at stake, the argument I men-
we need not canvass any other possible ways of arriving at it from tioned at the outset scems to have a much stronger pull. “Everyone
the argument I mentioned at the outset. has a right to life, so the unborn person has a right to life.” And
112. THE RIGHT THING TO DO ADEFENSE OF ABORTION 113
isn’t the child’s right to life weightier than anything other than the from him? To refrain from doing this is to allow him to continue
mother’s own right to life, which she might put forward as ground to use your kidneys. It could be argued that he has a right against
for an abortion? us that we should allow him to continue to use your kidneys. That
This argument treats the right to life as if it were unproblematic. is, while he had no right against us that we should give him the
cis not, and this seems to me to be precisely the source of the mistake. use of your kidneys, it might be argued that he anyway has a right
For we should now, at long last, ask what it comes to, to have a against us that we shall not now intervene and deprive him of the
right to life, In some views having a right to life includes having a right use of your kidneys, I shall come back to third-party interventions
to be given at least the bare minimum one needs for continued life. later. But certainly the violinist has no right against you that you
But suppose that what in fact is the bare minimum a man needs for shall allow him to continue to use your kidneys. As I said, if you
continued life is something he has no right at all to be given? If am do allow him to use them, it is a kindness on your part, and not
sick unto death, and the only thing that will save my life is the touch something you owe him.
of Henry Fonda’s cool hand on my fevered brow, then all the same, . . L would stress that I am not arguing that people do not
Thave no right to be given the touch of Henry Fonda’s cool hand on have a right to life—quite to the contrary, it seems to me that the
my fevered brow. It would be frightfully nice of him to fly in from the primary control we must place on the acceptability of an account of
West Coast to provide it. It would be less nice, though no doubt well rights is that it should turn out in that account to be a truth that all
meant, if my friends flew out to the West Coast and carried Henry persons have a right to life. I am arguing only that having a right to
Fonda back with them, But I have no right at all against anybody that life does not guarantee having either a right to be given the use of
he should do this for me. Or again, to return to the story I told earlier, or a right to be allowed continued use of another person's body—
the fact that for continued life that violinist needs the continued use even if one needs it for life itself, So the right to life will not serve
of your kidneys does not establish that he has a right to be given the the opponents of abortion in the very simple and clear way in which
continued use of your kidneys. He certainly has no right against you they seem to have thought it would.
that you should give him continued use of your kidneys. For nobody 4, There is another way to bring out the difficulty. In the most
has any right to use your kidneys unless you give him such a right; and ordinary sort of case, to deprive someone of what he has a right to
nobody has the right against you that you shall give him this right—if is to treat him unjustly. Suppose a boy and his small brother are
you do allow him to go on using your kidneys, this is a kindness on joindly given a box of chocolates for Christmas. If the older boy
your part, and not something he can claim from you as his due. Nor takes the box and refuses to give his brother any of the chocolates,
has he any right against anybody else that they should give him contin- he is unjust to him, for the brother has been given a right to half
ued use of your kidneys. Certainly he had no right against the Society of them, But suppose that, having learned that otherwise it means
of Music Lovers that they should plug him into you in the first place. nine years in bed with that violinist, you unplug yourself from him.
And if you now start to unplug yourself, having learned that you will You surely are not being unjust to him, for you gave him no right
otherwise have to spend nine years in bed with him, there is nobody to use your kidneys, and no one else can have given him any such
in the world who must ty to prevent you, in order to see to it that right. But we have to notice that in unplugging yourself, you are
he is given something he has a right to be given. killing him; and violinists, like everybody else, have a right to life,
Some people are rather stricter about the right to life. In and thus in the view we were considering just now, the right not to
their view, it does not include the right to be given anything, but be killed. So here you do what he supposedly has a right you shall
amounts to, and only to, the right not to be killed by anybody. But not do, but you do not act unjustly to him in doing it.
here a related difficulty arises. If everybody is to refrain from killing The emendation which may be made at this point is this: the
that violinist, then everybody must refrain from doing a great many right to life consists not in the right not to be killed, but rather in
different sorts of things. Everybody must refrain from slitting his the right not to be killed unjustly. This runs a risk of circularity, but
throat, everybody must refrain from shooting him—and everybody never mind: it would enable us to square the fact that the violinist
must refrain from unplugging you from him. But does he have a has a right to life with the fact that you do not act unjustly toward
right against everybody that they shall refrain from unplugging you him in unplugging yourself, thereby killing him. For if you do not
114 THE RIGHT THING TO DO ADEFENSE OF ABORTION 115
Kill him unjustly, you do not violate his right to life, and so it is no a pregnancy might result from it. It would leave out entirely the
wonder you do him no injustice. unborn person whose existence is due to rape. Pending the avail-

But if this emendation is accepted, the gap in the argument ability of some further argument, then, we would be left with the
against abortion stares us plainly in the face: it is by no means enough conclusion that unborn persons whose existence is due to rape have
to show that the fetus is a person, and to remind us that all persons no right to the use of their mothers’ bodies, and thus that aborting
have a right to life—we need to be shown also that killing the fetus them is not depriving them of anything they have a right to and
violates its right to life, i.e., that abortion is unjust killing, And is it? hence is not unjust killing.

I suppose we may take it as a datum that in a case of pregnancy And we should also notice that it is not at all plain that this
due to rape the mother has not given the unborn person a right to argument really does go even as far as it purports to. For there are
the use of her body for food and shelter. Indeed, in what pregnancy cases and cases, and the details make a difference. If the room is
could it be supposed that the mother has given the unborn person stuffy, and I therefore open a window to air it, and a burglar climbs
such a right? It is not as if there were unbom persons drifting about in, it would be absurd to say, “Ah, now he can stay, she’s given him
the world, to whom a woman who wants a child says “I invite you in.” a right to the use of her house—for she is partially responsible for

But it might be argued that there are other ways one can have his presence there, having voluntarily done what enabled him to get
acquired a right to the use of another person’s body than by hav- in, in full knowledge that there are such things as burglars, and that
ing been invited to use it by that person, Suppose a woman volun- burglars burgle.” It would be still more absurd to say this if I had
tarily indulges in intercourse, knowing of the chance it will issue had bars installed outside my windows, precisely to prevent burglars
in pregnancy, and then she does become pregnant; is she not in from getting in, and a burglar got in only because of a defect in the
part responsible for the presence, in fact the very existence, of the bars. It remains equally absurd if we imagine it is not a burglar who
unborn person inside her? No doubt she did not invite it in. But climbs in, but an innocent person who blunders or falls in. Again,
doesn’t her partial responsibility for its being there itself give it a suppose it were like this: people-seeds drift about in the air like pol-
right to the use of her body? If so, then her aborting it would be len, and if you open your windows, one may drift in and take root
more like the boy's taking away the chocolates, and less like your in your carpets or upholstery. You don’t want children, so you fix up
unplugging yourself from the violinist—doing so would be depriv- your windows with fine mesh screens, the very best you can buy. As
ing it of what it docs have a right to, and thus would be doing it can happen, however, and on very, very rare occasions docs happen,
an injustice. one of the screens is defective; and a seed drifts in and takes root.

‘And then, too, it might be asked whether or not she can kill it Does the person-plant who now develops have a right to the use of
even to save her own life: If she voluntarily called it into existence, your house? Surely not—despite the fact that you voluntarily opened
how can she now kill it, even in self-defense? your windows, you knowingly kept carpets and upholstered furni-

The first thing to be said about this is that it is something new. ture, and you knew that screens were sometimes defective. Someone
Opponents of abortion have been so concerned to make out the may argue that you are responsible for its rooting, that it docs have
independence of the fetus, in order to establish that it has a right a right to your house, because after all you could have lived out
to life, just as its mother does, that they have tended to overlook the your life with bare floors and furniture, or with sealed windows and
possible support they might gain from making out that the fetus is doors. But this won't do—for by the same token anyone can avoid a
dependent on the mother, in order to establish that she has a special pregnancy due to rape by having a hysterectomy, or anyway by never
kind of responsibility for it, a responsibility that gives it rights against leaving home without a (reliable!) army
her which are not possessed by any independent person—such as Tt scems to me that the argument we are looking at can estab-
an ailing violinist who is a stranger to her. lish at most that there are some cases in which the unborn person has

On the other hand, this argument would give the unborn a right to the use of its mother’s body, and therefore some cases in
person a right to its mother’s body only if her pregnancy resulted which abortion is unjust killing. There is room for much discussion
from a voluntary act, undertaken in full knowledge of the chance and argument as to precisely which, if any. But I think we should
116 THE RIGHT THING TO DO ADEFENSE OF ABORTION 117
sidestep this issue and leave it open, for at any rate the argument is to obscure what we should keep distinct, namely the difference
certainly does not establish that all abortion is unjust killing. between the boy’s refusal in this case and the boy’s refusal in the
5. There is room for yet another argument here, however. We earlier case, in which the box was given to both boys joindy, and in
surely must all grant that there may be cases in which it would be which the small brother thus had what was from any point of view
morally indecent to detach a person from your body at the cost of clear title to half.
his life. Suppose you learn that what the violinist needs is not nine A further objection to so using the term “right” that from the
years of your life, but only one hour: all you need do to save his life fact that A ought to do a thing for B, it follows that B has a right
is to spend one hour in that bed with him. Suppose also that letting against A that A do it for him, is that it is going to make the ques.
him use your kidneys for that one hour would not affect your health tion of whether or not a man has a right to a thing turn on how easy
in the slightest. Admittedly you were kidnapped. Admittedly you did it is to provide him with it; and this seems not merely unfortunate,
not give anyone permission to plug him into you. Nevertheless it but morally unacceptable. Take the case of Henry Fonda again. I
seems to me plain you ought to allow him to use your kidneys for said earlier that I had no right to the touch of his cool hand on my
that hour—it would be indecent to refuse. fevered brow, even though I needed it to save my life. I said it would
Again, suppose pregnancy lasted only an hour, and constituted be frightfully nice of him to fly in from the West Coast to provide
no threat to life or health. And suppose that a woman becomes me with it, but that I had no right against him that he should do
pregnant as a result of rape. Admittedly she did not voluntarily do so. But suppose he isn’t on the West Coast. Suppose he has only to
anything to bring about the existence of a child. Admittedly she did walk across the room, place a hand briefly on my brow—and lo, my
nothing at all which would give the unborn person a right to the life is saved. Then surely he ought to do it, it would be indecent to
use of her body. All the same it might well be said, as in the newly refuse. Is it to be said “Ah, well, it follows that in this case she has a
emended violinist story, that she ought to allow it to remain for that right to the touch of his hand on her brow, and so it would be an
hour—that it would be indecent in her to refuse. injustice in him to refuse"? So that I have a right to it when itis easy
Now some people are inclined to use the term “right” in such for him to provide it, though no right when it’s hard? It’s rather a
a way that it follows from the fact that you ought to allow a person shocking idea that anyone’s rights should fade away and disappear
to use your body for the hour he needs, that he has a right to use as it gets harder and harder to accord them to him,
your body for the hour he needs, even though he has not been given So my own view is that even though you ought to let the vio~
that right by any person or act. They may say that it follows also linist use your kidneys for the one hour he needs, we should not
that if you refuse, you act unjustly toward him. This use of the term conclude that he has a right to do so—we should say that if you
is perhaps so common that it cannot be called wrong; nevertheless refuse, you are, like the boy who owns all the chocolates and will
it seems to me to be an unfortunate loosening of what we would give none away, selEcentered and callous, indecent in fact, but not
do better to keep a tight rein on. Suppose that box of chocolates I unjust. And similarly, that even supposing a case in which a woman
mentioned earlier had not been given to both boys jointly, but was pregnant due to rape ought to allow the unborn person to use her
given only to the older boy. There he sits, stolidly eating his way body for the hour he needs, we should not conclude that he has a
through the box, his small brother watching enviously. Here we are right to do so; we should conclude that she is self-centered, callous,
likely to say “You ought not to be so mean. You ought to give your indecent, but not unjust, if she refuses. The complaints are no less
brother some of those chocolates.” My own view is that it just does grave; they are just different. However, there is no need to insist on
not follow from the truth of this that the brother has any right to this point. If anyone does wish to deduce “he has a right” from “you
any of the chocolates. If the boy refuses to give his brother any, he ought,” then all the same he must surely grant that there are cases
is greedy, stingy, callous—but not unjust. I suppose that the people in which it is not morally required of you that you allow that violinist
I have in mind will say it does follow that the brother has a right to use your kidneys, and in which he does not have a right to use
to some of the chocolates, and thus that the boy does act unjustly them, and in which you do not do him an injustice if you refuse.
if he refuses to give his brother any. But the effect of saying this And so also for mother and unborn child. Except in such cases as
118 THE RIGHT THING TO DO ADEFENSE OF ABORTION 119
the unborn person has a right to demand it—and we were leaving to call the police. Minimally Decent Samaritanism would call for
open the possibility that there may be such cases—nobody is morally doing at least that, and their not having done it was monstrous.
required to make large sacrifices, of health, of all other interests and After telling the story of the Good Samaritan, Jesus said “Go,
concerns, of all other duties and commitments, for nine years, or and do thou likewise.” Perhaps he meant that we are morally required
even for nine months, in order to keep another person alive. to act as the Good Samaritan did. Perhaps he was urging people to

6. We have in fact to distinguish between two kinds of Samaritan: do more than is morally required of them. At all events it seems plain
the Good Samaritan and what we might call the Minimally Decent that it was not morally required of any of the thirty-eight that he rush
Samaritan. The story of the Good Samaritan, you will remember, goes out to give direct assistance at the risk of his own life, and that it is not
like this: morally required of anyone that he give long stretches of his life—

nine years or nine months—to sustaining the life of a person who

A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell has no special right (we were leaving open the possibility of this) to

among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded demand it.

brim, and departed, leaving him half dead. Indeed with one rather striking class of except

‘And by chance there came down a certain priest that ways ig cla ptions, no one in
and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. any country in the world is legally required to do anywhere near as

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and mutch as this for anyone else, The class of exceptions is obvious. My
looked on him, and passed by on the other side. main concern here is not the state of the law in respect to abortion,

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he but it is worth drawing attention to the fact that in no state in this
was; and when he saw him he had compassion on him. country is any man compelled by law to be even a Minimally Decent

And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in Samaritan to any person; there is no law under which charges could
oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him be brought against the thirty-eight who stood by while Kitty Genovese
to an inn, and took care of him. died, By contrast, in most states in this country women are compelled

And on the morrow, when he departed, he took out two by law to be not merely Minimally Decent Samaritans, but Good
pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, “Take . , "1 ‘

ete ok him; and whatwoeter thow spendest more, when I come Samaritans to unborn persons inside them. This doesn’t by itself settle

again, I will repay thee.” (Luke 10:30-35) anything one way or the other, because it may well be argued that

» there should be Iaws in this country—as there are in many European
The Good Samaritan went out of his way, at some cost to himself, countries—compelling at least Minimally Decent Samaritanism. But
to help one in need of it. We are not told what the options were, it does show that there is a gross injustice in the existing state of the
that is, whether or not the priest and the Levite could have helped law. And it shows also that the groups currently working against liber-
by doing less than the Good Samaritan did, but assuming they could alization of abortion laws, in fact working toward having it declared
have, then the fact they did nothing at all shows they were not even unconstitutional for a state to permit abortion, had better start work-
Minimally Decent Samaritans, not because they were not Samaritans, ing for the adoption of Good Samaritan laws generally, or carn the
but because they were not even minimally decent. charge that they are acting in bad faith.

These things are a matter of degree, of course, but there is a I should think, myself, that Minimally Decent Samaritan laws
difference, and it comes out perhaps most clearly in the story of Kitty would be one thing, Good Samaritan laws quite another, and in fact
Genovese, who, as you will remember, was murdered while thirty- highly improper. But we are not here concerned with the law. What
cight people watched or listened, and did nothing at all to help her. we should ask is not whether anybody should be compelled by law to
A Good Samaritan would have rushed out to give direct assistance be a Good Samaritan, but whether we must accede to a situation in
against the murderer. Or perhaps we had better allow that it would which somebody is being compelled—by nature, perhaps—to be a
have been a Splendid Samaritan who did this, on the ground that it Good Samaritan, We have, in other words, to look now at third-party
would have involved a risk of death for himself. But the thirty-eight interventions. I have been arguing that no person is morally required
not only did not do this, they did not even trouble to pick up a phone to make large sacrifices to sustain the life of another who has no right
120 THE RIGHT THING TO DO DEFENSE OF ABORTION = 121
to demand them, and this even where the sacrifices do not include responsibility for it. They may wish to assume responsibility for it, or
life itself; we are not morally required to be Good Samaritans or they may not wish to. And I am suggesting that if assuming respon-
anyway Very Good Samaritans to one another. But what if a man can- sibility for it would require large sacrifices, then they may refuse. A
not extricate himself from such a situation? What if he appeals to us Good Samaritan would not refuse—or anyway, a Splendid Samaritan,
to extricate him? It seems to me plain that there are cases in which we if the sacrifices that had to be made were enormous. But then so
can, cases in which a Good Samaritan would extricate him. There you would a Good Samaritan assume responsibility for that violinist; so
are, you were kidnapped, and nine years in bed with that violinist lie would Henry Fonda, if he is a Good Samaritan, fly in from the West
ahead of you. You have your own life to lead. You are sorry, but you Coast and assume responsibility for me.
simply cannot see giving up so much of your life to the sustaining of 8. My argument will be found unsatisfactory on two counts by
his. You cannot extricate yourself, and ask us to do so. I should have many of those who want to regard abortion as morally permissible.
thought that—in light of his having no right to the use of your body— First, while I do argue that abortion is not impermissible, I do not
it was obvious that we do not have to accede to your being forced to argue that it is always permissible. There may well be cases in which
give up so much. We can do what you ask. There is no injustice to the carrying the child to term requires only Minimally Decent Samaritan-
violinist in our doing so. ism of the mother, and this is a standard we must not fall below. I am
7. Following the lead of the opponents of abortion, I have inclined to think it a merit of my account precisely that it does not
throughout been speaking of the fetus merely as a person, and what give a general yes or a general no. It allows for and supports our sense
I have been asking is whether or not the argument we began with, that, for example, a sick and desperately frightened fourteen-year-old
which proceeds only from the fetus’ being a person, really does estab- schoolgirl, pregnant due to rape, may of course choose abortion, and
lish its conclusion, I have argued that it does not that any law which rules this out is an insane law. And it also allows for
But of course there are arguments and arguments, and it may and supports our sense that in other cases resort to abortion is even
be said that I have simply fastened on the wrong one. It may be said positively indecent. It would be indecent in the woman to request
that what is important is not merely the fact that the fetus is a per- an abortion, and indecent in a doctor to perform it, if she is in her
son, but that it is a person for whom the woman has a special kind of seventh month, and wants the abortion just to avoid the nuisance of
responsibility issuing from the fact that she is its mother. And it might postponing a trip abroad. The very fact that the arguments I have
be argued that all my analogies are therefore irrelevant—for you do been drawing attention to treat all cases of abortion, or even all cases
not have that special kind of responsibility for that violinist, Henry of abortion in which the mother's life is not at stake, as morally on a
Fonda does not have that special kind of responsibility for me. And par ought to have made them suspect at the outset.
our attention might be drawn to the fact that men and women both Secondly, while I am arguing for the permissibility of abortion
are compelled by law to provide support for their children. in some cases, I am not arguing for the right to secure the death of
T have in effect dealt (briefly) with this argument in section 4 the unborn child. It is easy to confuse these two things in that up to
above; but a (still briefer) recapitulation now may be in order. Surely a certain point in the life of the fetus it is not able to survive outside
we do not have any such “special responsibility” for a person unless the mother’s body; hence removing it from her body guarantees its
we have assumed it, explicitly or implicitly. If a set of parents do not death. But they are importantly different. I have argued that you are
try to prevent pregnancy, do not obtain an abortion, and then at the not morally required to spend nine months in bed, sustaining the life
time of birth of the child do not put it out for adoption, but rather of that violinist; but to say this is by no means to say that if, when you
take it home with them, then they have assumed responsibility for unplug yourself, there is a miracle and he survives, you then have a
it, they have given it rights, and they cannot now withdraw support right to turn around and slit his throat. You may detach yourself even
from it at the cost of its life because they now find it difficult to go if this costs him his life; you have no right to be guaranteed his death,
on providing for it. But if they have taken all reasonable precautions by some other means, if unplugging yourself does not kill him. There
against having a child, they do not simply by virtue of their biologi- are some people who will feel dissatisfied by this feature of my argu.
cal relationship to the child who comes into existence have a special ment. A woman may be utterly devastated by the thought of a child,
122 THE RIGHT THING To DO.
a bit of herself, put out for adoption and never seen or heard of again.
She may therefore want not merely that the child be detached from
her, but more, that it die. Some opponents of abortion are inclined
to regard this as beneath contempt—thereby showing insensitivity to
what is surely a powerful source of despair. All the same, I agree that
the desire for the child’s death is not onc which anybody may gratify,
should it turn out to be possible to detach the child alive

At this place, however, it should be remembered that we have
only been pretending throughout that the fetus is a human being
from the moment of conception. A very early abortion is surely not
the killing of person, and so is not dealt with by anything I have said
here.

=== Don Marquis — Why Abortion is Immoral ===

100 THE RIGHT THING TO DO
positions, why they are not successful in convincing their opponents,
1 3 and why, to others, this issue seems to be unresolvable. An analysis of
CHAPTER the nature of this standoff suggests a strategy for surmounting it.
— Consider the way a typical anti-abortionist argues. She will argue
or assert that life is present from the moment of conception or that
Wh Abortion Is Immoral fetuses look like babies or that fetuses possess a characteristic such as
) a genetic code that is both necessary and sufficient for being human.
. Anti-abortionists seem to believe that (1) the truth of all of these
Don Marquis claims is quite obvious, and (2) establishing any of these claims is
ee sufficient to show that abortion is morally akin to murder.
‘A standard pro-choice strategy exhibits similarities. The pro-
choicer will argue or assert that fetuses are not persons or that
When people discuss the morality of abortion, they usually begin by fetuses are not rational agents or that fetuses are not social beings.
asking, Is the fetus a person, with a right to life? However, Don Marquis Pro-choicers seem to believe that (1) the truth of any of these claims
of the University of Kansas asks a different question: Do we have the is quite obvious, and (2) establishing any of these claims is sufficient
same reasons not to kill a fetus that we have not to kill an adult? Killing to show that an abortion is not a wrongful Killing.
adults, he says, is wrong because it deprives them of their future, But In fact, both the pro-choice and the anti-abortion claims do
in killing a fetus, we are also depriving it of its future. Thus, it seems seem to be true, although the “it looks like a baby” claim is more
inconsistent to object to one but not the other. difficult to establish the earlier the pregnancy. We seem to have a
Oe standoff. How can it be resolved?
‘As everyone who has taken a bit of logic knows, if any of these
arguments concerning abortion is a good argument, it requires
‘The view that abortion is, with rare exceptions, seriously immoral has not only some claim characterizing fetuses, but also some general
received litte support in the recent philosophical literature. No doubt moral principle that ties a characteristic of fetuses to having or
most philosophers affiliated with secular institutions of higher educa- not having the right to life or to some other moral character-
tion believe that the anti-abortion position is either a symptom of istic that will generate the obligation or the lack of obligation
irrational religious dogma or a conclusion generated by seriously con- not to end the life of a fetus. Accordingly, the arguments of the
fused philosophical argument. The purpose of this essay is to under- anti-abortionist and the pro-choicer need a bit of filling in to be
mine this general belief. This essay sets out an argument that purports regarded as adequate.
to show, as well as any argument in ethics can show, that abortion is, Note what each partisan will say. The ant-abortionist will claim
except possibly in rare cases, seriously immoral, that it is in the same that her position is supported by such generally accepted moral prin-
moral category as killing an innocent adult human being. ciples as “It is always prima facie seriously wrong to take a human
life” or “It is always prima facie seriously wrong to end the life of
I a baby.” Since these are generally accepted moral principles, her
position is certainly not obviously wrong. The pro-choicer will claim
‘A sketch of standard anti-abortion and pro-choice arguments exhibits that her position is supported by such plausible moral principles as
how those arguments possess certain symmetries that explain why parti- “Being a person is what gives an individual intrinsic moral worth” or
sans of those positions are so convinced of the correctness of their own “It is only seriously prima facie wrong to take the life of a member
of the human community.” Since these are generally accepted moral
From The Journal of Phiospty, vol. 6 (1989), pp. 188-85, 189-92, 194. Reprimed by principles, the pro-choice position is certainly not obviously wrong.
permission, Unfortunately, we have again arrived at a standoff.
99
WHY ABORTION IS IMMORAL 101 102. THE RIGHT THING TO DO
Now, how might one deal with this standofl? The standard experience due to our absence. Although such hubris is understand-
approach is to try to show how the moral principles of one’s oppo- able, such an explanation does not account for the wrongness of
nent lose their plausibility under analysis. It is easy to see how this is killing hermits, or those whose lives are relatively independent and
possible. On the one hand, the anti-abortionist will defend a moral whose friends find it easy to make new friends.
principle concerning the wrongness of killing which tends to be broad ‘A more obvious answer is better. What primarily makes kill-
in scope in order that even fetuses at an early stage of pregnancy will ing wrong is neither its effect on the murderer nor its effect on the
fall under it. The problem with broad principles is that they often. victim’s friends and relatives, but its effect on the victim. The loss
embrace too much. In this particular instance, the principle “It is of one’s life is one of the greatest losses one can suffer. The loss
always prima facie wrong to take a human life” seems to entail that of one’s life deprives one of all the experiences, activities, proj-
it is wrong to end the existence of a living human cancer-cell culture, ects, and enjoyments that would otherwise have constituted one’s
on the grounds that the culture is both living and human. Therefore, future. Therefore, killing someone is wrong, primarily because the
it seems that the anti-abortionist’s favored principle is too broad. killing inflicts (one of) the greatest possible losses on the victim.
On the other hand, the pro-choicer wants to find a moral prin- To describe this as the loss of life can be misleading, however.
ciple concerning the wrongness of killing which tends to be narrow The change in my biological state does not by itself make killing
in scope in order that fetuses will not fall under it. The problem with me wrong. The effect of the loss of my biological life is the loss
narrow principles is that they often do not embrace enough. Hence, to me of all those activities, projects, experiences, and enjoyments
the needed principles such as “It is prima facie seriously wrong to which would otherwise have constituted my future personal life.
kill only persons” or “It is prima facie wrong to kill only rational These activities, projects, experiences, and enjoyments are either
agents” do not explain why it is wrong to kill infants or young chil- valuable for their own sakes or are means to something else that
dren or the severely retarded or even perhaps the severely mentally is valuable for its own sake. Some parts of my future are not val
ill, Therefore, we seem again to have a standoff. The anti-abortionist ued by me now, but will come to be valued by me as I grow older
charges, not unreasonably, that pro-choice principles concerning and as my values and capacities change. When I am killed, I am
killing are too narrow to be acceptable; the pro-choicer charges, deprived both of what I now value which would have been part
not unreasonably, that anti-abortionist principles concerning killing of my future personal life, but also what I would come to value.
are too broad to be acceptable. . . Therefore, when I die, I am deprived of all of the value of my
. . . All this suggests that a necessary condition of resolving the future. Inflicting this loss on me is ultimately what makes killing
abortion controversy is a more theoretical account of the wrongness me wrong. This being the case, it would seem that what makes
of killing. After all, if we merely believe, but do not understand, why killing any adult human being prima facie seriously wrong is the
killing adult human beings such as ourselves is wrong, how could loss of his or her future.'. . .
we conceivably show that abortion is either immoral or permissible? The claim that what makes killing wrong is the loss of the vic-
tim’s future is directly supported by two considerations. In the first
nt place, this theory explains why we regard killing as one of the worst
of crimes. Killing is especially wrong, because it deprives the victim
In order to develop such an account, we can start from the follow- of more than perhaps any other crime. In the second place, people
ing unproblematic assumption concerning our own case: it is wrong with AIDS or cancer who know they are dying believe, of course, that
to kill us. Why is it wrong? Some answers can be easily eliminated. dying is a very bad thing for them. They believe that the loss of a
It might be said that what makes killing us wrong is that a killing future to them that they would otherwise have experienced is what
brutalizes the one who kills. But the brutalization consists of being makes their premature death a very bad thing for them. A better
inured to the performance of an act that is hideously immoral; theory of the wrongness of killing would require a different natural
hence, the brutalization does not explain the immorality. It might be property associated with killing which better fits with the attitudes
said that what makes killing us wrong is the great loss others would of the dying. What could it be?
WHY ABORTION IS IMMORAL 103 104 THE RIGHT THING TO DO

The view that what makes killing wrong is the loss to the victim and it is a plus for the claim that the loss of a future of value is
of the value of the victim’s future gains additional support when what makes killing wrong that it does not share this consequence.
some of its implications are examined. In the first place, it is incom- Tn the fourth place, the account of the wrongness of killing
patible with the view that it is wrong to kill only beings who are defended in this essay does straightforwardly entail that it is prima
biologically human. It is possible that there exists a different species facie seriously wrong to kill children and infants, for we do presume
from another planet whose members have a future like ours. Since that they have futures of value. Since we do believe that it is wrong
having a future like that is what makes killing someone wrong, this to kill defenseless little babies, it is important that a theory of the
theory entails that it would be wrong to kill members of such a spe- wrongness of killing easily account for this. Personhood theories
cies, Hence, this theory is opposed to the claim that only life that of the wrongness of killing, on the other hand, cannot straight-
is biologically human has great moral worth, a claim which many forwardly account for the wrongness of killing infants and young
anti-abortionists have seemed to adopt. This opposition, which this children, Hence, such theories must add special ad hoc accounts
theory has in common with personhood theories, seems to be a of the wrongness of killing the young. The plausibility of such ad
merit of the theory. hoc theories seems to be a function of how desperately one wants

In the second place, the claim that the loss of one’s future such theories to work. The claim that the primary wrong-making
is the wrong-making feature of one’s being killed entails the pos- feature of a killing is the loss to the victim of the value of its future
sibility that the futures of some actual nonhuman mammals on our accounts for the wrongness of killing young children and infants
‘own planet are sufficiently like ours that it is seriously wrong to kill directly; it makes the wrongness of such acts as obvious as we actu-
them also. Whether some animals do have the same right to life ally think it is. This is a further merit of this theory. Accordingly, it
as human beings depends on adding to the account of the wrong- seems that this value of a future-like-ours theory of the wrongness
ness of killing some additional account of just what it is about my of killing shares strengths of both sanctity-oflife and personhood
future or the futures of other adult human beings which makes accounts while avoiding weaknesses of both. In addition, it meshes
it wrong to kill us, No such additional account will be offered in with a central intuition concerning what makes killing wrong.
this essay. Undoubtedly, the provision of such an account would The claim that the primary wrong-making feature of a killing
be a very difficult matter. Undoubtedly, any such account would be is the loss to the victim of the value of its future has obvious conse-
quite controversial. Hence, it surcly should not reflect badly on this quences for the ethics of abortion. The future of a standard fetus
sketch of an elementary theory of the wrongness of killing that it is includes a set of experiences, projects, activities, and such which are
indeterminate with respect to some very difficult issues regarding identical with the futures of adult human beings and are identical
animal rights. with the futures of young children. Since the reason that is sufficient

In the third place, the claim that the loss of one’s future is to explain why it is wrong to kill human beings after the time of
the wrong-making feature of one’s being killed does not entail, as birth is a reason that also applies to fetuses, it follows that abortion
sanctity of human life theories do, that active euthanasia is wrong. is prima facie seriously morally wrong.
Persons who are severely and incurably ill, who face a future of pain This argument does not rely on the invalid inference that,
and despair, and who wish to die will not have suffered a loss if they since it is wrong to kill persons, it is wrong to kill potential persons
are killed. Itis, strictly speaking, the value of a human’s future which also, The category that is morally central to this analysis is the cat-
makes killing wrong in this theory. This being so, killing does not egory of having a valuable future like ours; it is not the category
necessarily wrong some persons who are sick and dying. Of course, of personhood. The argument to the conclusion that abortion is
there may be other reasons for a prohibition of active cuthanasia, prima facie scriously morally wrong proceeded independently of the
but that is another matter. Sanctity-ofhumanife theories seem to notion of person or potential person or any equivalent. Someone
hold that active euthanasia is seriously wrong even in an individual may wish to start with this analysis in terms of the value of a human
case where there seems to be good reason for it independently of future, conclude that abortion is, except perhaps in rare cireum-
public policy considerations. This consequence is most implausible, stances, seriously morally wrong, infer that fetuses have the right to
WHY ABORTION IS IMMORAL 105
life, and then call fetuses “persons” as a result of their having the
right to life. Clearly, in this case, the category of person is being
used to state the conclusion of the analysis rather than to generate
the argument of the analysis.

Of course, this value of a futurelike-ours argument, if sound,
shows only that abortion is prima facie wrong, not that it is wrong
in any and all circumstances. Since the loss of the future to a stan-
dard fetus, if killed, is, however, at least as great a loss as the loss of
the future to a standard adult human being who is killed, abortion,
like ordinary killing, could be justified only by the most compelling
reasons. The loss of one's life is almost the greatest misfortune that
can happen to one. Presumably abortion could be justified in some
circumstances, only if the loss consequent on failing to abort would
be at least as great. Accordingly, morally permissible abortions will
be rare indeed unless, perhaps, they occur so early in pregnancy
that a fetus is not yet definitely an individual. Hence, this argument
should be taken as showing that abortion is presumptively very seri-
ously wrong, where the presumption is very strong—as strong as
the presumption that killing another adult human being is wrong,
Note

1, T have been most influenced on this matter by Jonathan Glover,
Causing Death and Saving Lives (New York: Penguin, 1977), ch. 3; and Robert
Young, “What Is So Wrong with Killing People?” Philosophy LIV, 210 (1979),
515-28.

=== Peter Singer — on Abortion ===

Practical Ethics 6
that reason wrong on straightforward utilitarian grounds. So i 4
although there are ee in which it is not wrong to kill i TAKING LIFE: THE EMBRYO
animals, these situations are special ones, and do not cover very
many of the billions of premature deaths humans inflict, year AND THE FETUS
after year, on animals. |
In any case, at the level of practical moral principles, it would i
be better to reject altogether the killing of animals for food, ie
unless one must do so to survive. Killing animals for food makes !
us think of them as objects that we can use as we please. Their | fae EROcLEN
lives then count for little when weighed against our mere wants. i
As long as we continue to use animals in this way, to change | FY ethical issues are as bitterly fought over today as abor-
our attitudes to animals in the way that they should be changed i tion, and, while the pendulum has swung back and forth,
will be an impossible task. How can we encourage people to : neither side has had much success in altering the opinions of
respect animals, and have equal concern for their interests, if ,__ its opponents. Until 1967, abortion was illegal in almost all the
they continue to eat them for their mere enjoyment? To foster H Western democracies except Sweden and Denmark. Then Brit-
the right attitudes of consideration for animals, including non— | ain changed its law to allow abortion on broad social grounds,
self-conscious ones, it may be best to make it a simple principle | and in the 1973 case of Roe v Wade, the United States Supreme
to avoid killing them for food. | Court held that women have a constitutional right to an abor-
| tion in the first six months of pregnancy. Western European
| nations, including Roman Catholic countries like Italy, Spain
and France, all liberalised their abortion laws. Only the Republic
of Ireland held out against the trend.
( Opponents of abortion did not give up. In the United States,
| conservative Presidents have changed the composition of the
\ Supreme Court, which in turn has nibbled around the margins
\ of the Roe v Wade decision, allowing states to restrict, in various
| ways, access to abortion. Outside the United States, the issue
| @ of abortion re-surfaced in Eastern Europe after the collapse of
| 3 communism. The communist states had allowed abortion, but
as nationalist and religious forces gathered strength, there were
strong moves in countries like Poland for the re-introduction
| of restrictive laws. Since West Germany had more restrictive
| laws than East Germany, the need to introduce a single law for
| a united Germany also caused an intense debate.
| In 1978 the birth of Louise Brown raised a new issue about
134 ! 135
Practical Ethics ' Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus

the status of early human life. For Louise Brown was the first ! ficult ethical issues because the development of the human being
human to have been born from an embryo that had been fer- |< is a gradual process. If we take the fertilised egg immediately
tilised outside a human body. The success of Robert Edwards & after conception, it is hard to get upset about its death. The
and Patrick Steptoe in demonstrating the possibility of in vitro | © fertilised egg is a single cell. After several days, it is still only a
fertilization, or IVF, was based on several years of experimen- \ tiny cluster of cells without a single anatomical feature of the
tation on early human embryos — none of which had survived. ' being it will later become. The cells that will eventually become
IVF is now a routine procedure for certain types of infertility, i the embryo propet are at this stage indistinguishable from the
and has given rise to thousands of healthy babies. To reach this cells that will become the placenta and amniotic sac. Up to about
point, however, many more embryos had to be destroyed in | 14 days after fertilisation, we cannot even tell if the embryo is
experiments, and further improvement of IVF techniques will » going to be one or two individuals, because splitting can take
require continued experimentation. Perhaps more significant | lace, leading to the forsfation of identical twins. At 14 days,
still, for the long-term, are the possibilities for other forms of |< the first anatomical feature, the so-called primitive streak, ap-
experimentation opened up by the existence of a viable embryo ‘pears in the position in which the backbone will later develop.
outside the human body. Embryos can now be frozen and stored | 5 Atthis point the embryo could not possibly be conscious or feel
for many years before being thawed and implanted in a woman. i % — pain. At the other extreme is the adult human being. To kill a
Normal children develop from these embryos, but the technique | © human adult is murder, and, except in some special circum-
means that there are large numbers of embryos now preserved ! stances like those to be discussed in the next chapter, is un-
in special freezers around the world. (At the time of writing ' hesitatingly and universally condemned. Yet there is no obvious
there were about 11,000 frozen embryos in Australia alone.) H sharp line that divides the fertilised egg from the adult. Hence
Because the IVF procedure often produces more embryos than | the problem.
can safely be transferred to the uterus of the woman from whom s Most of this chapter will be concerned with the problem of
the egg came, many of these frozen embryos will never be j abortion, but the discussion of the status of the fetus will have
wanted, and presumably will either be destroyed, be donated | obvious implications for two related issues: embryo experi-
for research, or given to other infertile couples. 4 mentation, and the use of fetal tissue for medical purposes. I

Other new technologies loom just a little way ahead, Embryos \ begin the discussion of abortion stating the position of those
can be screened for genetic abnormalities, and then discarded | opposed to abortion, which I shall refer to as the conservative
if such abnormalities are found. Edwards has predicted that it | position, I shall then examine some of the standard liberal re-
will become scientifically feasible to grow embryos in vitro to i sponses, and show why they are inadequate. Finally I shall use
the point at which, about 17 days after fertilisation, they develop our earlier discussion of the value of life to approach the issue
blood stem cells, which could be used to treat various now- ‘from a broader perspective. In contrast to the common opinion
lethal blood diseases. Others, speculating about the further fu- : that the moral question about abortion is a dilemma with no
ture, have asked if one day we will have banks of embryos or i solution, I shall show that, at least within the bounds of non-
fetuses to provide organs for those who need them. | teligious ethics, there is a clear-cut answer and those who take

Abortion and destructive embryo experimentation pose dif- i a different view are simply mistaken.

136 137
=
Practical Ethics Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
E decides whether a being may or may not be killed? The con-
pan CONSE Yat enoslion servative can plausibly reply that the fetus/baby is the same
The central argument against abortion, put as a formal argu- | entity, whether inside or outside the womb, with the same
ment, would go something like this: i human features (whether we can see them or not) and the same
" are dani . | degree of awareness and capacity for feeling pain. A prematurely
fae Leite tities oon pa Sa A | born infant may well be less developed in these respects than a
Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus. fetus nearing the end of its normal term. It seems peculiar to
i hold that we may not kill the premature infant, but may kill
The usual liberal response is to deny the second premise of | the more developed fetus. The location of a being — inside or
this argument. So it is on whether the fetus is a human being outside the womb — should not make that much difference to
that the issue is joined, and the dispute about abortion is often HE the wrongness of killing it.
taken to be a dispute about when a human life begins. '
On this issue the conservative position is difficult to shake. ‘@
The conservative points to the continuum between the fertilised | Viability
egg and child, and challenges the liberal to point to any stage \ If birth does not mark a crucial moral distinction, should we
in this gradual process that marks a morally significant dividing | push the line back to the time at which the fetus could survive
line. Unless there is such a line, the conservative says, we ' outside the womb? This overcomes one objection to taking birth
must either upgrade the status of the earliest embryo to that | BH as the decisive point, for it treats the viable fetus on a par with
eine chil, 2 downgrade the status of the child to that of the infant, born prematurely, at the same stage of development.
embryo; but no one wants to allow children to be dis- Hl Viability is where the United States Supreme Court drew the
patched on the request of their parents, and so the only tenable i line aye v. Wade. The Court held that the state has a legitimate
position is to grant the fetus the protection we now grant the | #2 interest in protecting potential life, and this interest becomes
child. | ‘compelling’ at viability ‘because the fetus then presumably has
Is it true that there is no morally significant dividing line ! the capability of meaningful life outside the mother’s womb’.
between fertilised egg and child? Those commonly suggested | Therefore statutes prohibiting abortion after viability would not,
= birth, vibiliy quickening, and the onset of consciousness. the Court said, be unconstitutional. But the judges who wrote
et us consider these in turn. | the majority decision gave no indication why the mere capacity
| Eto exist outside the womb should make such a difference to the
Birth | ¥©. _ state’s interest in protecting potential life. After all, if we talk,
4 as the Court does, of potential human life, then the nonviable
Birth is the most visible possible dividing line, and the one that : E fetus is as much a potential adult human as the viable fetus. (I
would a liberals best. It coincides to some extent with our H shall return to this issue of potentiality shortly; but it is a dif-
sympathies — we are less disturbed at the destruction of a fetus | ferent issue from the conservative argument we are now dis-
we have never seen than at the death of a being we can all see, \ cussing, which claims that the fetus is a human being, and not
hear and cuddle. But is this enough to make birth the line that ; just a potential human being.)
138 3 139
Practical Ethics Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
There is another important objection to making viability the | be bom in an isolated area in which there is no a lactating
cut-off point. The point at which the fetus can survive outside = | a ee a a cee deny =
the mother’s body varies according to the state of medical | may be er S01 g
technology. Thirty years ago it was generally accepted that a : nih Ae eal ae a hee ae ia ne
baby born more than two months premature could not survive. & may 1 a
Now a six-month fetus — three months premature ~ can often | _thatin these situations the mother may take the life af her baby,
be pulled through, thanks to sophisticated medical techniques, | ‘¢ the son s ns = a . pid oe uae pase
and fetuses born after as little as five and a half months of 4 Panion. So it is not pl suggest that the
gestation have survived. This threatens to undermine the Su- | 4; _ the nonviable fetus on its mother gives her the right to kill it;
preme Court's neat division of pregnancy into trimesters, with ae and if dependence does not justify making viability the dividing
the boundary of viability lying between the second and third i line, it is hard to see what does.
trimesters. H
In the light of these medical developments, do we say that a ‘= Quickening
six-month-old fetus should not be aborted now, but could have | ; : i _ ;
been aborted without wrongdoing thirty years ago? The same | @_ If neither birth nor viability marks a morally significant dis-
comparison can also be made, not between the present and the —'|_# tinction, there is less still to be said for a third candidate,
past, but between different places. A six-month-old fetus might i : quickening. Quickening is the time when the mother first feels
have a fair chance of survival if born in a city where the latest | 1 the fetus move, and in traditional Catholic theology, this was
medical techniques are used, but no chance at all if born in a @ thought to be the moment at which the fetus gained its sou
remote village in Chad or New Guinea. Suppose that for some | : If we accepted that view, we bape nk Sears ee
Teason a woman, six months pregnant, was to fly from New ie pnt. ee Sah -_ i an Aaa ed ign a Ks
York to a New Guinea village and that, once she had arrived {qe humans off fr : ,
in the village, there was no way she could return quickly to a | 4 the fetus at quickening is an outmoded piece of superstition,
city with modern medical facilities. Are we to say that it would \ = discarded now ao by cae Z ene - .

i BS ese religious ines makes quic 4
eee re eee || no more than the time when the fetus is first felt to move of
New York, but now that she is in the village she may go ahead? 2 7 ' Piedras 7
The trip does not change the nature of the fetus, so why should = _ its own accord; the fetus is alive before this moment, an
it remove its claim to life? | | ultrasound studies have shown that fetuses do in fact start
The liberal might reply that the fact that the fetus is totally | @ moving as early as six weeks after fertilization, long before
dependent on the mother for its survival means that it has no | they can be felt to move. In any case, the capacity for —
right to life independent of her wishes. In other cases, however, ; e motion = o the bane Ane oar oan the
we do not hold that total dependence on another person means Seriousness of one’ -
that that person may decide whether one lives or dies. A new- | = the lack of such a capacity as negating the claims of paralysed
born baby is totally dependent on its mother, if it happens to \¢ People to go on living.
140 ig 141
ie
i
Practical Ethics i Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus

} that the development from the embryo to the infant is a gradual
Consciousness 1B process.
Movement might be thought to be indirectly of moral signif- if 3
icance, in so far as it is an indication of some form of awareness i SOME LIBERAL ARGUMENTS
~ and as we have already seen, consciousness, and the capacity | J nt

il le

to feel pleasure or pain, are of real moral significance. Despite |g Some liberals do not See the oa nies ie
this, neither side in the abortion debate has made much men- | @ fetus is an innocent human being, - argu meatal
tion of the development of consciousness in the fetus. Those | @® nonetheless permissible. I shall consider three argu
opposed to abortion may show films about the ‘silent scream’ | this view.
of the fetus when aborted, but the intention behind such films j J
is merely to stir the emotions of the uncommitted. Opponents ' | is
of abortion really want to uphold the right to life of the human i a hibiting abortion do not stop
being from conception, irrespective of whether it is conscious f The first argument is that laws prob - ing al ee
or not. For those in favour of abortion, to appeal to the absence | JB abortions, but merely drive them fa sia ai “
of a capacity for consciousness has seemed a risky strategy. | @& want to have abortions are en sree ae bee s
On the basis of the studies showing that movement takes place | & backyard abortionists ae ate Sen
as early as six weeks after fertilization, coupled with other | by a qualified medical arian alae fas Salhi a
studies that have found some brain activity as early as the | @ operation, but attempts to oe a naee : oa peaaiee
seventh week, it has been suggested that the fetus could be { f ple often result in serious medical comp ms anaisomeumes
capable of feeling pain at this early stage of pregnancy. That | death. Thus the ae bee Spates aces -
Possibility has made liberals very wary of appealing to the 3 teduce the number ol 7 aules ae ei ze
onset of consciousness as a point at which the fetus has a difficulties and dangers for a ep unwanted pica =
right to life. We shall return to the issue of consciousness in | 4 This argument has been influential in a A ple
the fetus later in this chapter, because it is relevant to the ' @ = more liberal abortion laws. It Moenatee uf , a aa
issue of embryo and fetal experimentation. We will also then | & Royal Commission on the Status of ee Me cor seen
consider an earlier marker that could be relevant to embryo | g that: ‘A law that has more bad effects than has a af “e
experimentation, but not to the abortion debate. As far as | @ law... As long . it exists in its present form thousands
abortion is concerned, the discussion up to now has shown | # women will break it

t 7 . 7 1 Pa
that the liberal search for a morally crucial dividing line be- | The main point to note _ = argument i a a p an
tween the newborn baby and the fetus has failed to yield any E a rare lows I a. sats : aie anor cai
event or stage of development that can bear the weight of g ment agail M : ee
separating those with a right to life from those who lack such & stale iene aaa in the abortion (epate.
a right, in a way that clearly shows fetuses to be in the latter i@ present arg :

: : ; , i i
category at the stage of development when most abortions | Bone could quite consistently accept it - jes oc a
take place. The conservative is on solid ground in insisting @ — Should allow abortion on request, w!
142 is 143
ry
Practical Ethics j Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
ciding oneself ~ if one were pregnant ~ or counselling another That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised
who was pregnant, that it would be wrong to have an abortion. ; over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is
It is a mistake to assume that the law should always enforce | a revo seen eee conmoe emma be or arenes
morality. It may be that, as alleged in the case of abortion, qm —-—- 0.40. or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because
| it will make him happier, because in the opinions of others, to
attempts to enforce right conduct lead to consequences no one t 3 do so would be wise or even right.
wants, and no decrease in wrong-doing; or it may be that, as. 14
is proposed by the next argument we shall consider, there is an {3% itr’s view is often and properly quoted in support of the repeal
area of private ethics with which the law ought not to interfere. | of laws that create ‘victimless crimes’ — like laws prohibiting
So this first argument is an argument about abortion law, not i; F homosexual relations between consenting adults, the use of
about the ethics of abortion. Even within those limits, however, 4 ‘jt itutis i
SYA a 2s E 3 = marijuana and other drugs, prostitution, gambling and so on.
it is open to challenge, for it fails to meet the conservative claim I | Abortion is often included in this list, for example by the crim-
that abortion is the deliberate killing of an innocent human | inologist Edwin Schur in his book Crimes Without Victims. Those
being, and in the same ethical category as murder. Those who f i ion a victi i i
and ; F who consider abortion a victimless crime say that, while every-
take this view of abortion will not rest content with the assertion | #@ one is entitled to hold and act on his or her own view about
that restrictive abortion laws do no more than drive women to \y the morality of abortion, no section of the community should
backyard abortionists. They will insist that this situation can be | try to force others to adhere to its own particular view. In a
changed, and the law properly enforced. They may also suggest | pluralist society, we should tolerate others with different moral
measures to make pregnancy easier to accept for those women 1 views and leave the decision to have an abortion up to the
who become pregnant against their wishes. This is a perfectly | @ woman concerned.
reasonable response, given the initial ethical judgment against The fallacy involved in numbering abortion among the vic-
abortion, and for this reason the first argument does not succeed | ge timless crimes should be obvious. The dispute about abortion
in avoiding the ethical issue. | @ is, largely, a di i
| ite about whether or not abortion does have
iq is, largely, a disput . a
\ 3 a ‘victim’. Opponents of abortion maintain that the victim of
j E abortion is the fetus. Those not opposed to abortion may deny
Not the Law’s Business? | @ that the fetus counts as a victim in any serious way. They might,
ij for instance, say that a being cannot be a victim unless it has
eee ae Ge an argument about abortion laws } @ interests that are violated, and the fetus has no interests. But
rather than the ethics of abortion. It uses the view that, as the oh is di imply i i
Zi ee at, i= jowever this dispute may go, one cannot simply ignore it on
report of a British government committee inquiring into laws | the grounds that people should not attempt to force others to
about homosexuality and prostitution put it: ‘There must re- | follow their own moral views. My view that what Hitler did to
main a realm of private morality and immorality that is, in brief ' @. the Jews is wrong is a moral view, and if there were any prospect
and crude terms, not the law’s business.’ This view is widely i i is i
dg % of a revival of Nazism I would certainly do my best to force
accepted among liberal thinkers, and can be traced back toJohn | others not to act contrary to this view. Mill’s principle is defen-
Stuart Mill's On Liberty. The’one very simple principle’ of this | _ sible only if it is restricted, as Mill restricted it, to acts that do
work is, in Mill’s words: ~ not harm others. To use the principle as a means of avoiding
144 4 145
Ce ; Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
7 e Note that Thomson’s conclusion does not depend on denying
the difficulties of resolving the ethical dispute over abortion is Jac che violinist is an innocent human being, with the seme
Royale it for granted tat abortion docs nou balm anon 142 sight to life as any other innocent human being. On the contrary,
which is precisely the point that needs to be proven before we | Thomson affirms that the violinist dees have a sight to life ~
can legitimately apply the principle to the case of abortion. | ae but to have a right to life does not, she says, entail a right to
| @ the use of another's body, even if without that use one will die.
[The parallel with pregnancy, especially pregnancy due to rape
A Feminist Argument | should be obvious. A woman pregnant through rape finds her-
' ' @ self, through no choice of her own. linked to a fetus in much
The last of the three arguments that seek to justify abortion | @ the same way as the person is linked to the violinist. True, a
without denying that the fetus is an innocent human being is | # Yegrant woman doesnot normally have to spend nine months
that a woman has a right to choose what happens to her own \ RE in bed, but opponents of abortion would not regard this as a
body. This argument became prominent with the rise of the | sufficient justification for abortion. Giving up a newborn baby
women’s liberation movement and has been elaborated by | # for adoption might be more difficult, psychologically, than part-
American philosophers sympathetic to feminism. An influential | 4@) ing from the violinist at the end of his illness; but this in itself
argument has been presented by Judith Jarvis Thomson by | § does not seem a sufficient reason for killing the fetus. Accepting
means of an ingenious analogy. Imagine, she says, that you % for the sake of the argument that the fetus does count as a fully-
wake up one morning and find yourslfin a hospital bed, some} 4) edged human being having an abortion when the fete is wat
how connected to an unconscious man in an adjacent bed. You | 4 Siabie hag the same moral signifcence. as unplugging oneself
are told that this man is a famous violinist with kidney disease. | & trom the violinist. So if we agree with Thomson that it would
The only way he can survive is for his circulatory system tobe = 14%" not be wrong to unplug oneself from the violinist, we must also
plugged into the system of someone else with the same blood { accept that, whatever the status of the fetus, abortion is not
type, and you are the only person whose blood is suitable. So (See ead

a society of music lovers kidnapped you, had the connecting = 14) rhomson’s argument can probably be extended beyond cases
Operation performed, and there you are. Since you are now in | of rape. Suppose that you found yourself connected to the vi-
a reputable hospital you could, if you choose, order a doctor to olinist, not because you were kidnapped by music lovers, but
disconnect you from the violinist; but the violinist will then | HE because you had intended to enter the hovpital to vist a sick
certainly die. On the other hand, if you remain connected for ] fiiend, and when you got into the elevator, you carelessly
only (only?) nine months, the violinist will have recovered and | prescea the wrong button, and ended up in a section of the
you can be unplugged without endangering him. 14 hospital normally visited only by those who have volunteered
Thomson believes that if you found yourself in this unex: 1 M49 be connected to patients who would not otherwise survive.
Pected predicament you would not be morally required to allow =| team of doctors, waiting for the next volunteer, assumed you
| @=§=—shrhmi¥feefBfSfsfeefeeseFePENFEEREE' __if'#
generous or kind of you to do so, but to say this is, Thomson | ‘thomson’s argument was sound in the kidnap case it is
claims, quite different from saying that you would be doing =| probably sound here too, since nine months unwillingly sup-

wrong if you did not do it. S

i 147
146 Ee
t |
eee Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
Porting another is a high price to pay for ignorance or care- 4 is interest rather than do the right thing. Nevertheless, they
lesones. In this way the argument might apply beyond rape [noid hold that to disconnect oneself is wrong.
case tothe much lager numberof women who become preg. | a : : ——
: come | In rejecting Thomson's theory of rights, and with it her judg-
eae ee + contraceptive falure, Bent in the case of the violinist, the utilitarian would also be
jut is the argument sound? The short answer is this: It is A \ :

: : i a. rejecting her argument for abortion. Thomson claimed that her
ee ee ee Peel ee argument justified abortion even if we allowed the life of the
sound; and it is unsound if ‘cory of rights is unsound. 1 ,

« + q 7 fetus to count as heavily as the life of a normal person. The

eee sae in question can be iMustraed by anther | utilitarian would say that it would be wrong to refuse to sustain

ee ee ee |B a person's life for nine months, if dat was the only way the
and the only thing that can seve my Ie f the wuch of my | ' peat pale

; : person could survive. Therefore if the life of the fetus is given
ee Re ee he ete aa Aa LE the same weight as the life of a normal person, the utilitarian
son says, even though I have a right to life, this does not mean | JB woutd say that it would be wrong to refuse to carry the fetus
that I have a right to force the film star to come to me, or that 4 " a .

; _ until it can survive outside the womb.
he is under any. moral obligation to fly over and save eae |i This concludes our discussion of the usual liberal replies to
aioe 5 Would be Gightfully mice of him to do so. THUS | the conservative argument against abortion. We have seen that
Thomson does a JB itberals have failed to establish a morally significant dividing
the best course of action, all things considered, or to do wha : ;
; line between the newborn baby and the fetus, and their argu-
Ee gees ee eee a eeu | ments — with the possible exception of Thomson's argument if
‘ights and obligations that allows us to justify our actions in- | EP hertheory of rights can be defended ~ also fail to justify abortion
ge bee heme ue ee | #2 in ways that do not challenge the conservative claim that the
X shal alee nein this conception cane has Sapa 8. |B fetus is an innocent human being. Nevertheless, it would be
Fee ee a rough fo notice that walltarian would telect | premature for conservatives to assume that their case against
is theory of rights, and would reject Thomson’s judgment in| Hob orion is sound. It is now time to bring into this debate some
the case ofthe violinist. The utilitarian would hold that, however | fj Sortion I Sulit. 1 How Bi ae aie
outraged I may be at having been kidnapped, if the conse- _| 8
quences of disconnecting myself from the violinist are, on bal- |
ance, and taking into account the interests of everyone affected, | ee eee
worse than the consequences of remaining connected, I ought | Jf Let us go back to the beginning. The central argument against
to remain connected. This does not necessarily mean that util- | abortion from which we started was:
itarians would regard a woman who disconnected herself as! . f
* i i First premise: It is wrong to kill an innocent human being.
Wicked or deserving of blame. They might recognize that she Second premise: A human fetus is an innocent human being.
has been placed in an extraordinarily difficult situation, one in Hl Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus.
which to do what is right involves a considerable sacrifice, They | HB te first set of replies we considered accepted the first premise
might even grant that most people in this situation would follow | of this argument but objected to the second. The second set of
148 { 49
\
\
Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
Practical Ethics :

i concern for all life, or a scale of concern impartially based on
replies rejected neither premise, but objected to drawing the {z the nature of the life in question, those who protest against
conclusion from these premises (or objected to the further con- 1% abortion but dine regularly on the bodies of chickens, pigs and
clusion that abortion should be prohibited by law). None of the 1 calves, show only a biased concer for the lives of members of
replies questioned the first premise of the argument. Given the \4 our own species. For on any fair comparison of morally relevant
widespread acceptance of the doctrine of the sanctity of human, | % characteristics, like rationality, self-consciousness, awareness,
life, this is not surprising; but the discussion of this doctrine in autonomy, pleasure and pain, and so on, the calf, the pig and
the preceding chapters shows that this premise is less secure | = the much derided chicken come out well ahead of the fetus at
than many people think. | © any stage of pregnancy — while if we make the comparison with

The weakness of the first premise of the conservative argu- & a fetus of less than three months, a fish would show more signs
ment is that it relies on our acceptance of the special status of | of consciousness.
human life. We have seen that ‘human’ is a term that straddles | ‘My suggestion, then, is that we accord the life of a fetus no
two distinct notions: being a member of the species Homo sap- | 4 greater value than the life of a nonhuman animal at a similar
iens, and being a person. Once the term is dissected in this way, # _ level of rationality, self-consciousness, awareness, capacity to
the weakness of the conservative’s first premise becomes ap- | ¢ feel, etc. Since no fetus is a person, no fetus has the same claim
parent. If ‘human’ is taken as equivalent to ‘person’, the second | % to life as a person. We have yet to consider at what point the
premise of the argument, which asserts that the fetus is a human 13 fetus is likely to become capable of feeling pain. For now it will
being, is clearly false; for one cannot plausibly argue that a fetus | % be enough to say that until that capacity exists, an abortion
is either rational or self-conscious. If, on the other hand, ‘hu- @ terminates an existence that is of no “intrinsic” value at all.
man’ is taken to mean no more than ‘member of the species | # —_ Afterwards, when the fetus may be conscious, though not sclf-
Homo sapiens’, then the conservative defence of the life of the '@ conscious, abortion should not be taken lightly (if a woman
fetus is based on a characteristic lacking moral significance and 1% ever does take abortion lightly). But a woman’‘s serious interests
so the first premise is false. The point should by now be familiar: | — would normally override the rudimentary interests even of a
whether a being is or is not a member of our species is, in itself | conscious fetus. Indeed, even an abortion late in pregnancy for
no more relevant to the wrongness of killing it than whether it # the most trivial reasons is hard to condemn unless we also
is or is not a member of our race. The belief that mere mem- | © condemn the slaughter of far more developed forms of life for
bership of our species, irrespective of other characteristics, % the taste of their flesh.
makes a great difference to the wrongness of killing a being is ee The comparison between the fetus and other animals leads
a legacy of religious doctrines that even those opposed to abor- @ _usto one more point. Where the balance of conflicting interests
tion hesitate to bring into the debate. | does make it necessary to kill a sentient creature, it is important

Recognising this simple point transforms the abortion issue. 1% that the killing be done as painlessly as possible. In the case of
‘We can now look at the fetus for what it is — the actual char- .@ — nonhuman animals the importance of humane killing is widely
acteristics it possesses — and can value its life on the same scale {| § accepted; oddly, in the case of abortion little attention is paid
as the lives of beings with similar characteristics who are not | to it. This is not because abortion is known to kill the fetus
members of our species. It now becomes apparent that the ‘Pro | swiftly and humanely. Late abortions — which are the very ones
Life’ or ‘Right to Life’ movement is misnamed. Far from having 3 151

150 | a
\ |
I
Practical Ethic
ae Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
in whi le to suffer — ett - is i
eee eres ee eee fetus is a potential human being. This is true whether by ‘human
formed by injecting a salt solution into the amniotic sac that | a r——“——r—“—i—rs—S
the fetus. It has been claimed that the effect of thi
ee ee ee } ational and self-conscious being, a person. The strong second
is to cause the fetus to have convulsions and die between one | i eeaes
: dead fetus is expelled ft : ; : °
and Saar Stee be Seni of a weaker first premise, for the wrongness of killing a potential
pal te Ne ee en ARS H human being - even a potential person — is more open to chal-
ae a a= 7 . |; lenge than the wrongness of killing an actual human being.
: U It is of course true that the potential rationality, self-
| q consciousness and so on ofa fetal Homo sapiens surpasses that
THE FETUS AS POTENTIAL LIFE | {of a cow o pig: but it does not follow that the fetus has a
erie apo sitam ' stronger claim to life. There is no rule that says that a potential
ne likely objection to the argument I have offered in the pre- :

‘ding section is that it takes int tt only the actual char. | X has the same value as an X, or has all the rights of an X.
Cone et eee ee eee heen There are many examples that show just the contrary. To pull
acteristics of the fetus, and not its potential characteristics. On \ i aE ee es
the basis of its actual characteristics, some opponents of abortion H erable oak. To drop a live chicken into a pot of bolling water
will admit, the fetus compares unfavourably with many non- | would be much worse than doing the same to an egg. Prince
human animals; it is when we consider its potential to become 19 Charles is a potential King of England, but he does not now
a mature human being that membership of the species Homo ao eee vights of a king "

: | .
ee owes) a and the (a) St eutpeses any |e In the absence of any general inference from ‘A is a potential

Eee orca ; | | '@ x’ to ‘A has the rights of an X’, we should not accept that a

Up to this point I have not raised the question of the potential | potential person should have the rights of a person, unless we
of the fetus because I thought it best to concentrate on the central | tan be given some specifi reason why this should holdin this
a Sa deena) cue eee reg | particular case. But what could that reason be? This question
arin — = kad sae a the fetus, can be mounted. Now ff" becomes especially pertinent if we recall the grounds on which,
Ane as eae oe | | in the previous chapter, it was suggested that the life of a person

ae | merits greater protection than the life of a being who is not a
First premise: It is wrong to kill a potential human being. |g person. These reasons — from the indirect classical utilitarian
Second premise: A human fetus is a potential human being. } concern with not arousing in others the fear that they may be
Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus. \ the next killed, the weight given by the preference utilitarian

The second premise of this argument is stronger than the i ofa tenes desler OIE 2) a et cea eee ae
second premise of the preceding argument. Whereas it is prob the capacity to see oneself as a continuing mental subject, and

: ‘ \% the principle of respect for autonomy ~ are all based on the fact
lematic whether a fetus actually is a human being — it depends om mee

on what we mean by the a ie anes be Ae Pie ae | that persons see themselves as distinct entities with a past and

| future. They do not apply to those who are not now and never
12 153

if

|

iF
Practical Ethics ' Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus

have been capable of seeing themselves in this way. If these are | ‘ tation: ae Me by jarificial means or by ‘nat-
the grounds for not killing persons, the nat potential for be- 4 wt ee a soninence on eed pean
coming a person does not count against killing. i ; . 5, :

It ee said that this reply Seer the relevance } all the difficulties of the ‘total’ form of utilitarianism, discussed
of the potential of the human fetus, and that this potential is | BM ae bees eee ee does a a any reason
important, not because it creates in the fetus a right or an to a — wae pene a, ier ate population
life, but because anyone who kills a human fetus deprives the |e a s already overpopuiate, the argument
world of a future rational and self-conscious being. If rational h ae aed aoe at al against al os 7 ‘eta
and self-conscious beings are inuinsically valuable, to kill a i 7 Z aE = “ Tae —— ind af fact = the yee a
human fetus is to deprive the world of something intrinsically is potenti person? If there is aa i es what it oa i
valuable, and so wrong. The chief problem with this as an ar- 1s eae a = ° oo we of ae ind reference to the fact that
gument against abortion — apart from the difficulty of estab- | 4 ea poman ous is ae Paul arene cone Professor
lishing that rational and self-conscious beings are of intrinsic of Religion at princeton iniversity, has said that modem ge-
value — is that it does not stand up as a reason for objecting to | e ane vie " Ae ss rene the fist fusion of Rae ovum
all abortions, or even to abortions carried out merely because 7 bas eadeeal ated’ Informational speck, seems to
the pregnancy is inconvenienty timed. Moreover the argument | 2 ead us to the conclusion that ‘all destruction of fetal life should
leads us to condemn practices other than abortion that most | = be classified as murder’, But why should this fact lead us to this
anti-abortionists accept. | { conclusion? A canine fetus is also, no doubt, genetically unique.

The claim that rational and self-conscious beings are intrins- | @ Does this mean that it is as wrong to abort a dog as a human?
ically valuable is not a reason for objecting to all abortions a when Sener vias are = ea one ae
because not all abortions deprive the world of a rational and Peated. Would Ramsey therefore think it permissible to abor
self-conscious being. Suppose a woman has been planning to te | i Ses ee oat ae
join a mountain-climbing expedition in June, and in January -
Ete learns that she is ary pregnant. She has no children ! a genetically unique. Does the fact that it is still indeterminate
at present, and firmly intends to have a child within a year or ij @ Precisely what genetically unique character those children
two. The pregnancy is unwanted only because it is inconven- would have make the use of contraceptives less evil than abor-
iently timed. Opponents of abortion would presumably think 2 tion? Why should it? And if it does could the looming prospect
an abortion in these circumstances particularly outrageous, for 'e ot puceessful ane -a Gee in which the cells of one
neither the life nor the health of the mother is at stake — only = eee erg eee Be yea ad that is a genetic Ch be
the enjoyment she gets from climbing mountains. Yet if abortion j matt of the original oe the seriousness bel anes
is wrong only because it deprives the world of a future person, = Suppose the woman who wants to go mountain climbing were
this caaaae not wrong; 2 does no more than delay the entry | able to have her abortion, take a cell from the aborted fetus and
of a person into the world. | © then reimplant that cell in her womb so that an exact genetic

On the other hand this argument against abortion does lead te ia ae the aborted fetus would develop — the only ‘difference
us to condemn practices that reduce the future human popu- fe ing that the pregnancy would now come to term six months

ie
154 [3 155
Practical Ethics

later, and thus she could still join the expedition. Would that \

make the abortion acceptable? I doubt that many opponents of

abortion would think so.
\@
le
i
i &
lf
is
'"
¢
ig

156 | 3

=== Carol Gilligan — In a Different Voice (1982) ===

duces a change in her thinking, "not drastically, but a little bit."
She realizes that in continuing the pregnancy, she would punish not
only herself but also her husband, toward whom she has begun to
feel "turned off and irritated." This leads her to consider the possi-
ble consequences of self-sacrifice both for the self and for others. At
the end, Janet says, "God can punish, but He can also forgive."
What remains in question for her is whether her claim to forgive-
ness is compromised by a decision that not only meets the needs of
others but also is "right and best for me."
The concern with selfishness and its equation with immorality
recur in an interview with Sandra, a twenty...nine-year-old Catholic
nurse, who punctuates her arrival for an abortion with the state-
ment, "I have always thought abortion was a fancy word for mur-
der." Initially she explains this murder as one of lesser degree, be-
cause "I am doing it because I have to do it. I am not doing it the
least bit because I want to." Thus, she judges it "not quite as bad.
You can rationalize that it is not quite the same." Since "keeping
the child for lots and lots of reasons was just sort of impractical and
out," she considers her options to be either abortion or adoption.
Having previously given up one child for adoption, she finds that
"psychologically there was no way that I could hack another adop-
tion. It took me about four and a half years to get my head on
straight. There was just no way I was going to go through it again."
The decision thus reduces in her eyes to a choice between mur-

----- page break -----

86
In a Different Voice
dering the fetus or damaging herself. The choice is further compli-
cated by the fact that to continue the pregnancy would hurt not
only herself but also her parents, with whom she lives. In the face
of these manifold moral contradictions, the psychological honesty
demanded in counseling finally allows her to reach a decision:
On my own, I was doing it not so much for myself; I was
doing it for my parents. I was doing it because the doctor told
me to do it, but I had never resolved in my mind that I was
doing it for me. Actually, I had to sit down and admit, "No, I
really don't want to go the mother route now. I honestly don't
feel that I want to be a mother." And that is not really such a
bad thing to say after all. But that is not how I felt up until
talking to [her counselor]. It was just a horrible way to feel, so
I just wasn't going to feel it, and I just blocked it right out.
As long as her consideration remains "moral," abortion can be
justified only as an act of sacrifice, a submission to necessity where
the absence of choice precludes responsibility. In this way, she can
avoid self-condemnation, since, "When you get into moral stuff,
then you are getting into self-respect, and if I do something that I
feel is morally wrong, then I tend to lose some of my self-respect as
a person." Her evasion of responsibility, critical to maintaining the
innocence she considers necessary for self-respect, contradicts the
reality of her participation in the abortion decision. The dishonesty
in her plea of victimization creates a conflict that generates the
need for a more inclusive understanding. She must now resolve the
emerging contradiction in her thinking between her two uses of the
terms right and wrong: "I am saying that abortion is morally wrong,
but the situation is right, and I am going to do it. But the thing is
that eventually th














not competent to punish' " (p.
241). The affinity between Satyagraha and psychoanalysis lies in
their shared commitment to seeing life as an "experiment in truth,"
in their being "somehow joined in a universal 'therapeutics,' com-
mitted to the Hippocratic principle that one can test truth (or the
healing power inherent in a sick situation) only by action which
avoids harm-or better, by action which maximizes mutuality and
minimizes the violence caused by unilateral coercion or threat" (p.
247). Thus Erikson takes Gandhi to task for his failure to acknowl-
edge the relativity of truth. This failure is manifest in the coercion
of his claim to exclusive possession of the truth, his ''unwillingness
to learn from anybody anything except what was approved by the
'inner voice' " (p. 236). This claim led Gandhi, in the guise of love,
to impose his truth on others without awareness ofor regard for the
extent to which he thereby did violence to their integrity.
The moral dilemma, arising inevitably out ofa conflict of
truths, is by definition a "sick situation" in that its either/or formu-
lation leaves no room for an outcome that does not do violence.
The resolution ofsuch dilemmas, however, lies not in the self-de-
ception of rationalized violence: "I was" said Gandhi, "a cruelly
kind husband. I regarded myself as her teacher and so harassed her
out ofmy blind love for her" (p. 233). The resolution lies rather in
the replacement of the underlying antagonism with a mutuality of
respect and care.
Gandhi, whom Kohlberg cites as exemplifying the sixth stage
of moral judgment and whom Erikson initially sought as a model
of an adult ethical sensibility, is criticized by a judgment that re-
fuses to look away from or condone the infliction of harm. In deny-
ing the validity of his wife's reluctance to open her home to strang-
ers and in blinding himself to the different reality of adolescent
sexuality and temptation, Gandhi compromised in his everyday life
the ethic of nonviolence to which, in principle and in public, he
steadfastly adhered.
The blind willingness to sacrifice people to truth, however, has
always been the danger of an ethics abstacted from life. This will-
ingness links Gandhi to the biblical Abraham, who prepared to sac-
rifice the life of his son in order to demonstrate the integrity and
supremacy of his faith. Both men, in the limitations of their father-
hood, stand in implicit contrast to the woman who comes before
Solomon and verifies her motherhood by relinquishing truth in

----- page break -----

Concepts ofSelfand Morality 105
order to save the life of her child. It is the ethics of an adulthood
that has become principled at the expense of care that Erikson
comes to criticize in his assessment of Gandhi's life.
This same criticism is dramatized explicitly as a contrast be-
tween the sexes in The Merchant of Venice, where Shakespeare goes
through an extraordinary complication of sexual identity, dressing a
male actor as a female character who in tum poses as a male judge,
in order to bring into the masculine citadel ofjustice the feminine
plea for mercy. The limitation of the contractual conception ofjus-
tice is illustrated through the absurdity of its literal execution, while
the need to "make exceptions all the time" is demonstrated contra-
puntally in the matter of the rings. Portia, in calling for mercy,
argues for that resolution in which no one is hurt, and as the men
are forgiven for their failure to keep both their


















her
than leading to license, is "the mother of virtue," since enslavement
causes not only abjectness and despair but also guile and deceit.
Wollstonecraft's "arrogance" in daring "to exert my own reason"
and challenge "the mistaken notions that enslave my sex" was sub-
sequently matched by Stanton's boldness in telling a reporter to
"put it down in capital letters: SELF-DEVELOPMENT IS A HIGHER
DUTY THAN SELF-SACRIFICE. The thing which most retards and mili-
tates against women's self-development is self-sacrifice." Countering
the accusation of selfishness, the cardinal sin in the ladder of femi-
nine virtue that reached toward an ideal of perfect devotion and
self-abnegation, in relation not only to God but to men, these early
proponents of women's rights equated self-sacrifice with slavery and
asserted that the development of women, like that of men, would
serve to promote the general good.
As in claiming rights women claimed responsibility for them-
selves, so in exercising their reason they began to address issues of
responsibility in social relationships. This exercise of reason and the
attempt of women to exert control over conditions affecting their
lives led, in the latter halfof the nineteenth century, to various
movements for social reform, ranging from the social purity move-
ments for temperance and public health to the more radical move-
ments for free love and birth control. All of these movements
joined in support of suffrage, as women, claiming their intelligence
and, to varying degrees, ~heir sexuality as part of their human na-
ture, sought through the vote to include their voices in the shaping
of history and to change prevailing practices that were damaging to
present and future generations. While the disappointment of suf-
frage is recorded in the failure of many women to vote and the ten-
dency of others in voting only to second their husbands' opinions,
the twentieth century has in fact witnessed the legitimation of many
of the rights the early feminists sought.
Given these changes in women's rights, the question arises as
to their effect, a question pointed at present both by the renewed
struggle for women's rights and by the centennial celebrations of
many of the women's colleges to which the feminists' call for
women's education gave rise. In tying women's self-development to
the exercise of their own reason, the early feminists saw education
as critical for women if they were to live under their own control.
But as the debate over the current Equal Rights Amendment re-
peats many of those that occurred in the past, so the issue of

----- page break -----

130 In Q D!lJerent Voice
women's self-development continues to raise the specter ofselfish-
ness, the fear that freedom for women will lead to an abandonment
of responsibility in relationships. Thus the dialogue between rights
and responsibilities, in its public debate and its psychic representa-
tion, focuses the conflicts raised by the inclusion of women in
thinking about responsibility and relationships. While this dialogue
elucidates some of the more puzzling aspects of women's opposition
to women's rights, it also illuminates how the concept of rights en-
gages women's thinking about moral conflict and choice.
The century marked by the movement for women's rights is
spanned roughly by the publication of two novels, both written by
women and posing the same moral dilemma, a heroine in love with
her cousin Lucy's man. In their parallel triangles these nove






































 student study, 136, 139, 141,
142,145
Self-sacrifice, 67, 68, 70, 129, 131-132,
134, 149, 157; in college student study,
54, 135, 136, 165; in abortion decision
study, 74, 81-82, 83, 84, 87, 90
Seneca Falls Declaration, 128
Separation: and men's identity, 8, 156,
161, 163, 170, 171; in human develop-
ment, II, 12,35,48, 151, 152, ISS, 164,
170; in rights and responsibilities
study, 37-38; in college student study,
39, 42, 43-44, 53, 57; and women's de-
velopment, 155-156, 157, 171
Shakespeare, William, 105
Shaw, George Bernard, IS
Solomon, 104-105
Stack, Carol, 168-169
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 128, 129, 132
Stereotypes, sex-role, 17
Stoller, Roben, 7
Strunk, William, 6
Supreme Court, 6, 132
Survival in abortion decision study,
75-76, 87, 90, 105, 109, 110-111, 112,
114, 126, 127
Tancred and Chlorinda, 13
Thematic Apperceptjon Test, 14,39-44
Tolstoy, Sophie, 124
Troilus and Cressida, 13
Truth, 82-83, 84-85, 103-104, 109, 119,
138, 149, 166
Vaillant, George, 153-155, 171
Violence, 40-45,62, 74, 103-104
Virgil, 151, 152, 155
Waterfall, The, 131, 143, 144-145,
149-150
White, E. B., 6
Whiting, Beatrice, 41
Wild Strawberries, 106-107
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 128-129, 132
Woolf, Virginia, 16
Work and moral development, 89, 173

=== Peter Singer — Practical Ethics (excerpt) ===

less
to say, many will disagree with what I have to say. Objections
and counter-arguments are welcome. Since the days of Plato,
philosophy has advanced dialectically as philosophers have of-
fered reasons for disagreeing with the views of other philoso-
phers. Disagreement is good, because it is the way to a more
defensible position; the suggestion that the views I have ad-
vanced should not even be discussed is, however, a totally dif-
ferent matter, and one that I am quite content to leave to readers,
after they have read and reflected upon the chapters that follow.
Though I have not changed my views on the issues that have
aroused the most fanatical opposition, this revised edition con-
tains many other changes. I have added two new chapters on
important ethical questions that were not covered in the pre-
vious edition: Chapter 9 on the refugee question and chapter
lOon the environment. Chapter 2 has a new section on equality
and disability. The sections of Chapter 6 on embryo experi-
mentation and fetal tissue use are also new. Every chapter has
been reworked, factual material has been updated, and where
my position has been misunderstood by my critics, I have tried
to make it clearer.
As far as my underlying ethical views are concerned, some
of my friends and colleagues will no doubt be distressed to find
that countless hours spent discussing these matters with me
have served only to reinforce my conviction that the conse-
quentialist approach to ethics taken in the first edition is fun-
damentally sound. There have been two significant changes to
the form of consequentialism espoused. The first is that I make
use of the distinction drawn by R. M. Hare, in his book Moral
Thinking, between two distinct levels of moral reasoning - the
everyday intuitive level and the more reflective, critical level.
The second is that I have dropped the suggestion - which I
advanced rather tentatively in the fifth chapter ofthe first edition
- that one might try to combine both the 'total' and 'prior
x
Preface
existence' versions of utilitarianism, applying the former to sen-
tient beings who are not self-conscious and the latter to those
who are. I now think that preference utilitarianism draws a
sufficiently sharp distinction between these two categories of
being to enable us to apply one version of utilitarianism to all
sentient beings. Nevertheless, I am still not entirely satisfied with
my treatment of this whole question of how we should deal
with ethical choices that involve bringing a being or beings into
existence. As Chapters 4-7 make clear, the way in which we
answer this perplexing question has implications for the issues
of abortion, the treatment of severely disabled newborn infants,
and for the killing of animals. The period between editions of
this book has seen the publication of by far the most intricate
and far-sighted analysis to date of this problem: Derek Parfii's
Reasons and Persons. Unfortunately, Parfit himself remains baf-
fled by the questions he has raised, and his conclusion is that
the search for 'Theory X' - a satisfactory way of answering the
question - must continue. So perhaps it is hardly to be expected
that a satisfactory solution can emerge in this, both slimmer
and more wide-ranging, volume.
In writing this book I have made extensive use of my own
previously published articles and books. Thus Chapter 3 is based
on Animal Liberation (New York ReviewlRandom House, 2d













hen
all points within the circle - this is the 'range' - have the prop-
erty of being within the circle, and they have this property
equally, Some points may be closer to the centre and others
nearer the edge, but all are, equally, points inside the circle.
Similarly, Rawls suggests, the property of 'moral personality' is
a property that virtually all humans possess, and all humans
who possess this property possess it equally. By 'moral person-
ality' Rawls does not mean 'morally good personality'; he is
using 'moral' in contrast to 'amoral'. A moral person, Rawls
says, must have a sense of justice. More broadly, one might say
that to be a moral person is to be the kind of person to whom
one can make moral appeals, with some prospect that the appeal
will be heeded.
Rawls maintains that moral personality is the basis of human
equality, a view that derives from his 'contract' approach to
justice. The contract tradition sees ethics as a kind of mutually
beneficial agreement - roughly, 'Don't hit me and I won't hit
you.' Hence only those capable of appreciating that they are not
being hit, and of restraining their own hitting accordingly, are
within the sphere of ethics.
There are problems with using moral personality as the basis
of equality. One objection is that having a moral personality is
a matter of degree. Some people are highly sensitive to issues
of justice and ethics generally; others, for a variety of reasons,
have only a limited awareness of such principles. The suggestion
that being a moral person is the minimum necessary for coming
18
Equality and Its Implications
within the scope of the principle of equality still leaves it open
just where this minimal line is to be drawn. Nor is it intuitively
obvious why, if moral personality is so important, we should
not have grades of moral status, with rights and duties corre-
sponding to the degree of refinement of one's sense of justice.
Still more serious is the objection that it is not true that all
humans are moral persons, even in the most minimal sense.
Infants and small children, along with some intellectually dis-
abled humans, lack the required sense of justice. Shall we then
say that all humans are equal, except for very young or intel-
lectually disabled ones? This is certainly not what we ordinarily
understand by the principle of equality. If this revised principle
implies that we may disregard the interests of very young or
intellectually disabled humans in ways that would be wrong if
they were older or more intelligent, we would need far stronger
arguments to induce us to accept it. (Rawls deals with infants
and children by including potential moral persons along with
actual ones within the scope of the principle of equality. But
this is an ad hoc device, confessedly designed to square his
theory with our ordinary moral intuitions, rather than some-
thing for which independent arguments can be produced. More-
over although Rawls admits that those with irreparable
intellectual disabilities 'may present a difficulty' he offers no
suggestions towards the solution of this difficulty.)
So the possession of 'moral personality' does not provide a
satisfactory basis for the principle that all humans are equal. I
doubt that any natural characteristic, whether a 'range property'
or not, can fulfil this function, for I doubt that there is any
morally significant property that all humans possess equally.
There is another possible li






 poorer parts of the world. I shall try to show then that
it does not force us to abandon the principle, although the
principle may force us to abandon some other views we hold.
Meanwhile we shall see how the principle assists us in discussing
some of the controversial issues raised by demands for equality.
EQUALITY AND GENETIC DIVERSITY
In 1969 Arthur Jensen published a long article in the Harvard
Educational Review entitled 'How Much Can We Boost IQ and
Scholastic Achievement?' One short section of the article dis-
cussed the probable causes of the undisputed fact that - on
average - African Americans do not score as well as most other
Americans in standard IQ tests. Jensen summarised the upshot
of this section as follows:
All we are left with are various lines of evidence, no one of which
is definitive alone, but which, viewed altogether, make it a not
unreasonable hypothesis that genetic factors are strongly impli-
cated in the average negro-white intelligence difference. The
preponderance of evidence is, in my opinion, less consistent with
a strictly environmental hypothesis than with a genetic hypoth-
esis, which, of course, does not exclude the influence of envi-
ronment or its interaction with genetic factors.
This heavily qualified statement comes in the midst of a detailed
review of a complex scientific subject, published in a scholarly
journal. It would hardly have been surprising if it passed un-
noticed by anyone but scientists working in the area of psy-
chology or genetics. Instead it was widely reported in the
popular press as an attempt to defend racism on scientific
grounds. Jensen was accused of spreading racist propaganda
and likened to Hitler. His lectures were shouted down and stu-
26
Equality and Its Implications
dents demanded that he be dismissed from his university post.
H. J. Eysenck, a British professor of psychology who supported
Jensen's theories received similar treatment, in Britain and Aus-
tralia as well as in the United States. Interestingly, Eysenck's
argument did not suggest that those of European descent have
the highest average intelligence among Americans; instead, he
noted some evidence that Americans of Japanese and Chinese
descent do better on tests of abstract reasoning (despite coming
from backgrounds lower on the socioeconomic scale) than
Americans of European descent.
The opposition to genetic explanations of alleged racial dif-
ferences in intelligence is only one manifestation of a more
general opposition to genetic explanations in other socially sen-
sitive areas. It closely parallels, for instance, initial feminist hos-
tility to the idea that there are biological factors behind male
dominance. (The second wave of the feminist movement seems
to be more willing to entertain the idea that biological differ-
ences between the sexes are influential in, for example, greater
male aggression and stronger female caring behaviour.) The
opposition to genetic explanations also has obvious links with
the intensity of feeling aroused by sociobiological approaches
to the study of human behaviour. The worry here is that if
human social behaviour is seen as deriving from that of other
social mammals, we shall come to think of hierarchy, male
dominance, and inequality as part of our evolved nature, and
as unchangeable. More recently, the commencement of the in-
ternational scientific project that is designed to map the human
genome - that is, to provide a det

















re-
fighters, we can justifiably exclude someone who is confined to
a wheelchair; and if we are seeking a proof-reader, a blind
person need not apply. But the fact that a specific disability may
rule a person out of consideration for a particular position does
not mean that that person's interests should be given less con-
sideration than those of anyone else. Nor does it justify discrim-
ination against disabled people in any situation in which the
particular disability a person has is not relevant to the employ-
ment or service offered.
For centuries, disabled people have been subjected to prej-
udice, in some cases no less severe than those under which
racial minorities have suffered. Intellectually disabled people
were locked up, out of sight of the public, in appalling condi-
tions. Some were virtual slaves, exploited for cheap labour in
households or factories. Under a so-called "euthanasia pro-
gram" the Nazis murdered tens of thousands of intellectually
disabled people who were quite capable of wanting to continue
living and enjoying their lives. Even today, some businesses will
not hire a person in a wheelchair for a job that she could do as
well as anyone else. Others seeking a salesperson will not hire
someone whose appearance is abnormal. for fear that sales will
fall. (Similar arguments were used against employing members
of racial minorities; we can best overcome such prejudices by
becoming used to people who are different from us.)
We are now just starting to think about the injustice that has
been done to disabled people, and to consider them as a dis-
advantaged group. That we have been slow in doing so may
well be due to the confusion between factual equality and moral
equality discussed earlier in this chapter. Because disabled peo-
ple are different, in some respects, we have not seen it as dis-
criminatory to treat them differently. We have overlooked the
fact that, as in the examples given above, the disabled person's
disability has been irrelevant to the different - and disadvan-
52
Equality and Its Implications
tageous - treatment. There is therefore a need to ensure that
legislation that prohibits discrimination on grounds of race, eth-
nicity or gender also prohibits discrimination on the grounds of
disability, unless the disability can be shown to be relevant to
the employment or service offered.
Nor is that all. Many of the arguments for affirmative action
in the case of those disadvantaged by race or gender apply even
more strongly to disabled people. Mere equality of opportunity
will not be enough in situations in which a disability makes it
impossible to become an equal member of the community. Giv-
ing disabled people equal opportunity to attend university is
not much use if the library is accessible only by a flight of stairs
that they cannot use. Many disabled children are capable of
benefitting from normal schooling, but are prevented from tak-
ing part because additional resources are required to cope with
their special needs. Since such needs are often very central to
the lives of disabled people, the principle of equal consideration
of interests will give them much greater weight than more minor
needs of others. For this reason, it will generally be justifiable
to spend more on behalf of disabled people than we spend on
behalf of others. Just how much more is, of course, a difficult
question. Where resources are scarce, there must be some limit.
By giving


























the possibility of cases in which it would be better not to respect
a person's desire to continue living, because the person could
be killed in complete secrecy, and a great deal of unalleviated
misery could thereby be prevented, this kind of thinking has
no place at the intuitive level that should guide our everyday
actions. So, at least. a classical utilitarian can argue.
That is, I think, the gist of what the classical utilitarian would
say about the distinction between killing a person and killing
some other type of being. There is, however, another version
of utilitarianism that gives greater weight to the distinction. This
other version of utilitarianism judges actions, not by their ten-
dency to maximise pleasure or minimise pain, but by the extent
to which they accord with the preferences of any beings affected
by the action or its consequences. This version of utilitarianism
is known as 'preference utilitarianism'. It is preference utilitar-
ianism, rather than classical utilitarianism, that we reach by
universalising our own interests in the manner described in the
opening chapter of this book - if, that is, we make the plausible
move of taking a person's interests to be what. on balance and
after reflection on all the relevant facts, a person prefers.
According to preference utilitarianism, an action contrary to
the preference of any being is, unless this preference is out-
weighed by contrary preferences, wrong. Killing a person who
prefers to continue living is therefore wrong, other things being
equal. That the victims are not around after the act to lament
the fact that their preferences have been disregarded is irrele-
vant. The wrong is done when the preference is thwarted.
94
What's Wrong with Killing?
For preference utilitarians, taking the life of a person will
normally be worse than taking the life of some other being,
since persons are highly future-oriented in their preferences. To
kill a person is therefore, normally, to violate not just one, but
a wide range of the most central and significant preferences a
being can have. Very often, it will make nonsense of everything
that the victim has been trying to do in the past days, months,
or even years ... In contrast, beings who cannot see themselves
as entities with a future cannot have any preferences about their
own future existence. This is not to deny that such beings might
struggle against a situation in which their lives are in danger,
as a fish struggles to get free of the barbed hook in its mouth;
but this indicates no more than a preference for the cessation
of a state of affairs that is perceived as painful or frightening.
Struggle against danger and pain does not suggest that fish
are capable of preferring their own future existence to non-
existence. The behaviour of a fish on a hook suggests a reason
for not killing fish by that method, but does not in itself suggest
a preference utilitarian reason against killing fish by a method
that brings about death instantly, without first causing pain or
distress. (Again, remember that we are here considering what
is especially wrong about killing a person; I am not saying that
there are never any preference utilitarian reasons against killing
conscious beings who are not persons.)
Does a Person Have a Right to Life?
Although preference utilitarianism does provide a direct reason
for not killing a person, some may find the reason - even when
coupled with the imp






from the lives of those leading pleasant
lives; the other is to eliminate those leading pleasant lives. Th~
former leaves behind beings who experience less pleasure than
they otherwise would have. The latter does not. This means
that we cannot move automatically from a preference for a
pleasant life rather than an unpleasant one, to a preference for
a pleasant life rather than no life at all. For, it might be objected,
being killed does not make us worse off; it makes us cease to
exist. Once we have ceased to exist, we shall not miss the plea-
sure we would have experienced.
Perhaps this seems sophistical - an instance of the ability of
academic philosophers to find distinctions where there are no
significant differences. If that is what you think, consider the
opposite case: a case not of reducing pleasure, but of increasing
it. There are two ways of increasing the amount of pleasure in
the world: one is to increase the pleasure of those who now
exist; the other is to increase the number of those who will lead
pleasant lives. If killing those leading pleasant lives is bad be-
cause of the loss of pleasure, then it would seem to be good to
increase the number of those leading pleasant lives. We could
do this by having more children, provided we could reasonably
expect their lives to be pleasant, or by rearing large numbers of
animals under conditions that would ensure that their lives
would be pleasant. But would it really be good to create more
pleasure by creating more pleased beings?
102
What's Wrong with Killing?
There seem to be two possible approaches to these perplexing
issues. The first approach is simply to accept that it is good to
increase the amount of pleasure in the world by increasing the
number of pleasant lives, and bad to reduce the amount of
pleasure in the world by reducing the number of pleasant lives.
This approach has the advantage of being straightforward and
clearly consistent, but it requires us to hold that if we could
increase the number of beings leading pleasant lives without
making others worse off, it would be good to do so. To see
whether you are troubled by this conclusion, it may be helpful
to consider a specific case. Imagine that a couple are trying to
decide whether to have children. Suppose that as far as their
own happiness is concerned, the advantages and disadvantages
balance out. Children will interfere with their careers at a crucial
stage of their professional lives, and they will have to give up
their favourite recreation, cross-country skiing, for a few years
at least. At the same time, they know that, like most parents,
they will get joy and fulfilment from having children and watch-
ing them develop. Suppose that if others will be affected, the
good and bad effects will cancel each other out. Finally, suppose
that since the couple could provide their children with a good
start in life, and the children would be citizens of a developed
nation with a high living standard, it is probable that their
children will lead pleasant lives. Should the couple count the
likely future pleasure of their children as a significant reason
for having children? I doubt that many couples would, but if
we accept this first approach, they should.
I shall call this approach the 'total' view since on this view
we aim to increase the total amount of pleasure (and reduce
the total amount of pain) and are indifferent whether this is
done by increasing the pleasur





















on several years of experimen-
tation on early human embryos - none of which had survived.
IVF is now a routine procedure for certain types of infertility,
and has given rise to thousands of healthy babies. To reach this
point, however, many more embryos had to be destroyed in
experiments, and further improvement of IVF techniques will
require continued experimentation. Perhaps more significant
still, for the long-term, are the possibilities for other forms of
experimentation opened up by the existence of a viable embryo
outside the human body. Embryos can now be frozen and stored
for many years before being thawed and implanted in a woman.
Normal children develop from these embryos, but the technique
means that there are large numbers of embryos now preserved
in special freezers around the world. (At the time of writing
there were about 11,000 frozen embryos in Australia alone.)
Because the IVF procedure often produces more embryos than
can safely be transferred to the uterus of the woman from whom
the egg came, many of these frozen embryos will never be
wanted, and presumably will either be destroyed, be donated
for research, or given to other infertile couples.
Other new technologies loom just a little way ahead. Embryos
can be screened for genetic abnormalities, and then discarded
if such abnormalities are found. Edwards has predicted that it
will become scientifically feasible to grow embryos in vitro to
the point at which, about 17 days after fertilisation, they develop
blood stem cells, which could be used to treat various now-
lethal blood diseases. Others, speculating about the further fu-
ture' have asked if one day we will have banks of embryos or
fetuses to provide organs for those who need them.
Abortion and destructive embryo experimentation pose dif-
136
Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
ficult ethical issues because the development ofthe human being
is a gradual process. If we take the fertilised egg immediately
after conception, it is hard to get upset about its death. The
fertilised egg is a single cell. After several days, it is still only a
tiny cluster of cells without a single anatomical feature of the
being it will later become. The cells that will eventually become
the embryo proper are at this stage indistinguishable from the
cells that will become the placenta and amniotic sac. Up to about
14 days after fertilisation, we cannot even tell if the embryo is
going to be one or two individuals, because splitting can take
place, leading to the formation of identical twins. At 14 days,
the first anatomical feature, the so-called primitive streak, ap-
pears in the position in which the backbone will later develop.
At this point the embryo could not possibly be conscious or feel
pain. At the other extreme is the adult human being. To kill a
human adult is murder, and, except in some special circum-
stances like those to be discussed in the next chapter, is un-
hesitatingly and universally condemned. Yet there is no obvious
sharp line that divides the fertilised egg from the adult. Hence
the problem.
Most of this chapter will be concerned with the problem of
abortion, but the discussion of the status of the fetus will have
obvious implications for two related issues: embryo experi-
mentation, and the use of fetal tissue for medical purposes. I
begin the discussion of abortion stating the position of those
opposed to abortion, which I shall refer to as the conservative








arelessness, or contraceptive failure.
But is the argument sound? The short answer is this: It is
sound if the particular theory of rights that lies behind it is
sound; and it is unsound if that theory of rights is unsound.
The theory of rights in question can be illustrated by another
of Thomson's fanciful examples: suppose I am desperately ill
and the only thing that can save my life is the touch of my
favourite film star's cool hand on my fevered brow. Well, Thom-
son says, even though I have a right to life, this does not mean
that I have a right to force the film star to come to me, or that
he is under any. moral obligation to fly over and save me -
although it would be frightfully nice of him to do so. Thus
Thomson does not accept that we are always obliged to take
the best course of action, all things considered, or to do what
has the best consequences. She accepts, instead, a system of
rights and obligations that allows us to justify our actions in-
dependently of their consequences.
I shall say more about this conception of rights in Chapter 8.
At this stage it is enough to notice that a utilitarian would reject
this theory of rights, and would reject Thomson's judgment in
the case of the violinist. The utilitarian would hold that, however
outraged I may be at having been kidnapped, if the conse-
quences of disconnecting myself from the violinist are, on bal-
ance, and taking into account the interests of everyone affected,
worse than the consequences of remaining connected, I ought
to remain connected. This does not necessarily mean that util-
itarians would regard a woman who disconnected herself as
wicked or deserving of blame. They might recognize that she
has been placed in an extraordinarily difficult situation, one in
which to do what is right involves a considerable sacrifice. They
might even grant that most people in this situation would follow
148
Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
self-interest rather than do the right thing. Nevertheless, they
would hold that to disconnect oneself is wrong.
In rejecting Thomson's theory of rights, and with it her judg-
ment in the case of the violinist, the utilitarian would also be
rejecting her argument for abortion. Thomson claimed that her
argument justified abortion even if we allowed the life of the
fetus to count as heavily as the life of a normal person. The
utilitarian would say that it would be wrong to refuse to sustain
a person's life for nine months, if that was the only way the
person could survive. Therefore if the life of the fetus ~s. gi~en
the same weight as the life of a normal person, the utIhtanan
would say that it would be wrong to refuse to carry the fetus
until it can survive outside the womb.
This concludes our discussion of the usual liberal replies to
the conservative argument against abortion. We have seen that
liberals have failed to establish a morally significant dividing
line between the newborn baby and the fetus, and their argu-
ments - with the possible exception of Thomson's argument if
her theory of rights can be defended - also fail to justify abortion
in ways that do not challenge the conservative claim that the
fetus is an innocent human being. Nevertheless, it would be
premature for conservatives to assume that their case against
abortion is sound. It is now time to bring into this debate some
more general conclusions about the value of life.
THE VALUE OF FETAL LIFE
Let us go back to the be











ights or interests that may be violated or
harmed by using them for these purposes? I have already argued
that the fetus has no right to, nor strictly speaking even an
interest in, life. But we have seen that, in the case of animals,
to say that a being has no right to life does not mean that the
being has no rights or interests at all. If the fetus is capable of
feeling pain, then, like animals, the fetus has an interest in not
suffering pain, and that interest should be given equal consid-
eration with the similar interests of any other being. It is easy
to imagine that keeping a fetus alive after an abortion in order
to preserve the tissue of the fetus in the best possible condition
could cause pain and suffering to a fetus capable of feeling pain.
So we must now return to a more detailed investigation of a
topic touched upon earlier in this chapter: When does the fetus
become conscious?
Fortunately it is now possible to give a reasonably definite
answer to this question. The part of the brain associated with
sensations of pain, and more generally with consciousness, is
the cerebral cortex. Until 18 weeks of gestation, the cerebral
cortex is not sufficiently developed for synaptic connections to
take place within it - in other words, the signals that give rise
to pain in an adult are not being received. Between 18 and 25
weeks, the brain of the fetus reaches a stage at which there is
some nerve transmission in those parts associated with con-
164
Taking Life: The Embryo and the Fetus
sciousness. Even then, however, the fetus appears to be in a
persistent state of sleep, and therefore may not be able to per-
ceive pain. The fetus begins to 'wake up' at a gestational age of
around 30 weeks. This is, of course, well beyond the stage of
viability, and a 'fetus' that was alive and outside the womb at
this stage would be a premature baby, and not a fetus at all.
In order to give the fetus the benefit of the doubt, it would
be reasonable to take the earliest possible time at which the
fetus might be able to feel anything as the boundary after which
the fetus should be protected. Thus we should disregard the
uncertain evidence about wakefulness, and take as a more def-
inite line, the time at which the brain is physically capable of
receiving si

[…remainder of this reading omitted for length…]
