# Readings pack: stage1_mind_simulation

The following passages are the readings the agent should reference. Cite specific lines or paragraphs when pointing the student toward them. Do not summarise unprompted.

=== Identity Theory and Functionalism ===

Identity theorists believe that every mental state can be matched to some description of ibe brain.
For the philosopher, it doesn’t matter that we don’t yet know quite what that brain state is or how
to describe it precisely. If experiencing pain means that C-fibres are firing in particular ways in my
brain, then the identity statement is: Pain = C-fibres firing. Neuroscientists can fill in exact details
in due course. Hence, for the identity theorist, being in love is a particular kind of electrical and
chemical event. Having a belief means that electrical activity is occurring in a particular part of
my brain.

Explanations of identity theory are often linked to other cases where updates in our SelemeLnc
understanding have revealed two entities to be identical. For example, we now accept ‘H2O’ as the
correct account of the molecular structure of water. This does not mean that we now commonly
speak of showering in H20, or would ever request a drink containing two hydrogen molecules
for every molecule of oxygen. Similarly, we now understand that scientifically, lightning can be
described as ‘electrical discharge’. Venus, the Morning Star and the Evening Star are now realised
to be one and the same planet.

Identity theorists argue that falling in love will always be thought of as falling in love, but this
doesn’t mean that its state cannot be identical with electrical activity in a certain part of the brain
combined with particular chemical releases into the bloodstream and so on.

However, it is important to ask, what do identity theorists mean by ‘identity’? Do they mean that
any person experiencing bright red will be in exactly the same brain state as any other person
experiencing bright red? This is the strongest version of the identity theory, known as type-type
identity, linked to the hope that neuroscience will one day be able to map out human mental
experience in the form of universal brain activity. On this account, my thought that this is a
lovely day to take a walk in the park will correspond to ‘Neural State 35678120’ on this and every
other time I, or any other person, has that thought. A weaker form of identity theory is known as
token-token identity. In this version, I might have a slightly different brain state each time I think
it is a lovely day to take a walk in the park. And my friend will have a different brain state again.

THINK

1.

2.

Progress in neuroscience has been much slower than most identity theorists
expected in the 1950s and 60s. For the most part, ‘type-type’ identities have not
been established. Does this undermine the identity theory, do you think?
A pain may be sharp or burning, but a brain event wouldn’t be described as
sharp or burning. Is this a problem for the identity theory of mind?

:

es Ss

by

i

The identity theory seems intuitively plausible to most of us. It certainly has less trouble
explaining how damage to the brain, or taking drugs, can cause changes in people’s mental states
and personalities. It also boasts simplicity: why believe there are two substances if we can explain
things with one substance? This is the principle of Ockham’s Razor, explained above (p.125).
However, identity theorists are still challenged by problems of qualia and consciousness, to be
outlined later in this Theme.

Identity Theory

Human understanding of the brain and nervous system has come a long way since the time of
Descartes. You probably learnt in middle school science classes that brains and nervous systems
consist of long cells called neurons. Electrical changes — themselves the products of chemical
signals — occur along neurons, and hence brain events can be described as electro-chemical
events.

Between 1800 and 1950 huge advances were made in neuroscience, increasingly suggesting that
events of the mind could actually be located in the brain. Fifty years ago it looked likely that
before long, neuroscience would be able to pinpoint the precise brain location of every mental
function.

In the 1950s, papers published by Herbert Feig] in the United States, and by J.J.C.Smart (Famous
Philosopher File p.132), U.T.Place (Famous Philosopher File p.132) and David Armstrong (Famous
Philosopher File p.132) in Australia, argued for what has come to be called the Identity Theory
of Mind (also known as ‘Australian materialism’). This theory argued that mental properties are
identical with brain (that is, physical) properties.

130

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Metaphysics

ial






DISCUSS

ye

How plausible do you find it that being in love, having a spiritual experience or being
in pain all correspond with particular patterns of chemistry and electrical activity
in the brain? Does it diminish these experiences to say they are nothing more than
electro-chemical events?

WRITE

Neuroscientists advise that: Severe injury to the frontal lobe area of the brain
causes dramatic personality changes.

1.

2.

3.

Construct an argument in standard form, with this statement as the conclusion,
and using the reasoning of Identity Theory in the premises.

Does this argument convince you that identity theory is correct? Can you think
of any ways it could still be incorrect?

How might substance dualism explain brain injury and its effects on
personality?

THINK

% es

Is Ockham’s Razor a good principle upon which to support or reject a theory? Why vy
or why not?

134

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Metaphysics

135









THINK
Identify three examples of qualia that you have experienced yourself today. Do they
match Dennett’s four descriptors?

O if

es

yy

aD

e

Suter

am

er experienced

exp

i

i

‘blue’

Try to describe the experience of blue’ for someone who has never
colour.
»
¢

_Isit possible to provide a complete description?
font
Would it help to have scientific knowledge - for example,
complete physical description of the wavelength of light which hits your retina,
and
the electro-chemical activity which follows in your brain, to produce the

le, to be able to give a
:

a

:

experience of yellow?
What can be concluded about the nature of the mind from this activity?

:

DISCUSS

fos Ro}

(

Do you think qualia are challenging for t

:

:

he theories of mind you have studied

so

ted

:

‘

far? Explain why or why not.

|

| |
|
|
H||
|
Mi)
i}
|
|

\|

|

|
|
|

}

Qualia and the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness:
iali

?
A challenge for materialism, oF not:
Qualia (singular — quale) refers to the subjective qualities of our conscious experience. The
whiteness of whipped egg whites, the taste of pavlova, the pain I feel when I’ve eaten too much
pavlova and so on, are examples of my immediate experience of the world, or of how it feels to
be a conscious being. Qualia are problematic for materialist philosophers of mind, because they
seem to resist being captured by descriptions of what is going on in the brain. Qualia are under-
described by the language of physics.

Australian philosopher David Chalmers (Famous Philosopher File p.133) has called the subjective
nature of our conscious experience, including qualia, the Hard Problem of consciousness. He
contrasts this with things about the human mind that he says are easier for materialism to explain.
These include our reactions to the environment, recording information, controlling our behaviour
and attention, and accessing and reporting on our inner states.

a.

4

.

In his book, Consciousness Explained (1991), American Daniel Dennett (Famous Philosopher File

1.
2.
3.

4.

aL ao

Ineffable: that is, they cannot be described in language; they have to be directly experienced.
Intrinsic: that is, they are not necessarily dependent on other factors of experience.
Private: that is, they

are unique to the subject who experiences them, and they cannot be

h

;

°

"

Directly apparent to consciousness: that is, to experience a quale is to know one experiences a
Dire appre oceans iat tr expen
quale, and to know all there is to know about that quale

For all these reasons, qualia are difficult to discuss and form arguments about.

144

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

s
m
s
a
n
I
e
i
i
i
a
e
t
c
i
e
e
c
n
e
i
n
e
e
i
r
e

'

9

Thomas Nagel, 1974 ‘What is it like to be a bat?” Philosophical Review 83.4, p.436

Metaphysics

145












Problems for Identity Theory: Leibniz’ Principle and Multiple Realization
Excerpt edited from: Ian Ravenscroft, A Beginner’s Guide to Philosophy of Mind

Leibniz’ Principle or the Principle of the Indiscernibility of Identicals.

The mathematical principle of the ‘indiscernibility of identicals’ says that if X and Y are identical, then
they have all their properties in common. When we say ‘identical’, we mean ‘exactly the same’. For
example: Sally is identical to the tallest person in the room. In that case, Sally must be the tallest
person in the room.

Now, because they are identical (meaning exactly the same), if Sally has the property of an IQ of 175,
so does the tallest person in the room; and if the tallest person in the room has the property of owning
a Harley Davidson, so does Sally. For two things to be identical, they cannot differ in any way.

Leibniz’ principle also applies to “types” of things. For example, the type ‘water’ is identical to the type
‘H2O’. If water boils at 100 Celsius, so does H2O; and if H2O conducts electricity, so does water.

So if, as the Identity Theorist claims, pain is identical to a specific type of brain activity, then every
property of pain must also be a property of that brain activity. This means that if we find a property of
pain which cannot be a property of that brain activity then they are not identical, and Identity Theory is
proven false.

Now, all pain has a property which is definitively part of its experience: it hurts. This is the property we
will focus on for the next section.

Multiple Realization: humans, animals, and potentially artificial intelligences might all experience pain,
but the physical processes causing this pain could be quite different. So, if those physical processes of
pain are all different, then how can they all share the same property of feeling hurt?

Let's agree that, for the sake of argument, in humans’ pain is a unique part of our brain responding.
Now, we can easily imagine animals with brains quite different from our own. Let's agree, again for the
sake of argument, that squid have brains quite different from our own and lack that part of the brain
which we use to respond to pain (This isn't at all implausible. The squid brain is very different from our
own. From an evolutionary perspective, humans and squid are only very distantly related.)

So far, we have assumed only that squid don't have that human part of the brain. It seems quite likely,
though, that they experience pain that hurts (or at least we have no good reasons to doubt that they
can be in pain). Consequently, the identity theory is in trouble: if squid can lack that part of the brain but
feel pain that has the property of hurting, then it cannot be the case that pain is identical to a specific
type of brain activity.

This poses a serious challenge to the Identity Theory. If pain can be realised in different ways across
different physical systems (i.e., different brain structures or even non-biological systems), then pain
cannot be identical to one specific type of brain activity. In other words, if pain (a mental state) can have
properties that are not shared by a specific type of brain activity (a physical state), then according to
Leibniz’s Principle, they cannot be identical. Thus, Multiple Realization suggests that mental states are
more than just physical processes and cannot be fully explained by them.

NOTE TO LEXIE: Functionalism, however, suggests that ‘pain’ and ‘feeling hurt’ are both merely
processes which function to detect injury. For the Functionalist, it doesn’t matter if ‘feeling hurt’ is
different for everyone/every species: it retains the same function.

However, while Functionalism can explain how different physical states can experience functionally
similar mental states, it is extremely limited in how it can explain the properties of the mind.


0

Functionalism
Functionalism is a theory of mind which is compatible with materialism. However, it actually
sidesteps the question of what the mind is and instead asks the question, ‘what does the mind
do?’ or ‘how does it function?’. The mind is thereby distinguished from the body not by virtue of
substance but because of what it does that is different from the functions performed by the body.

This kind of distinction is familiar in the computing world. The functionalist is not interested
so much in the hardware as in the software programs of the mind, that is, the operations the
mind performs rather than the physical mechanisms behind them. Functionalism examines the
functions of the mind in causal relationship to one another as well as in relation to sensory inputs
and behavioural outputs.

The American philosopher Hilary Putnam (Famous Philosopher File p.139) was among the first to
draw this parallel between hardware and software in a computer, and brain and mind in humans,
in his 1960 paper, ‘Mind and Machines’. In a later paper, ‘Philosophy and our Mental Life’ (1973),
Putnam argued against the eliminativist’s idea that we should discard descriptions of our mental
lives. He used the analogy of a square peg that will not fit into a round hole. There are different
levels of explanation we can give for this. We can give the dimensions in millimetres of peg and
hole. Or we can explain that if you put the square peg at the entrance to the hole, you can see that
the corners of the peg stick out and stop the peg going in the hole. There would be physicists with
powerful computers who could calculate the precise configurations of the subatomic particles
in the peg and in the hole in order to explain why peg into hole won't go. But, argues Putnam,
this technical level is of no use to us, just as it is of no use to most of us to understand the precise
activity of ones and zeros in the hardware of our computers. Similarly, he says, we have no need
for the technical minutiae of the electrical and chemical activity going on in our brains; rather, we
are interested in informative descriptions that help us live our lives. That, says Putnam, means we
should preserve the propositional attitudes of the kind Churchland would reject.

These ideas were developed into a complete philosophy of mind by American Jerry Fodor (1935-
2017). In “The Mind-Body Problem’ (1981), Fodor wrote:

In the past 15 years a philosophy of mind called functionalism that is neither dualist
nor materialist has emerged from philosophical reflection on developments in
artificial intelligence, computational theory, linguistics, cybernetics and psychology.
All these fields, which are collectively known as the cognitive sciences, have in
common a certain level of abstraction and a concern with systems that process
information. Functionalism, which seeks to provide a philosophical account of this
level of abstraction, recognises the possibility that systems as diverse as human beings,
calculating machines and disembodied spirits could all have mental states. In the
functionalist view the psychology of a system depends not on the stuff it is made of
(living cells, metal or spiritual energy) but on how the stuff is put together.”

A large part of functionalism’s appeal for many is its preservation of much of our traditional
view of the mind and our everyday language. All the mental items in our common-sense or folk
psychology - including the propositional attitudes and the way they interact — are considered a
coherent program, worthy of preservation.

FAMOUS PHILOSOPHER FILE
Hilary Putnam (1926-2016)

Born in Chicago, Illinois, Hilary Putnam is known for his
contributions to mathematics and computer science as well
as philosophy. In philosophy he subjected all arguments,
including his own, to rigorous and repeated scrutiny, which
sometimes led him to alter his views. He is best known in
philosophy of mind, as the first thinker to formulate the
theory of functionalism. He ended up rejecting his own functionalist arguments, but
functionalism remains the most widely held view of mind among philosophers today.

WRITE

Yosh

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Explain the functionalist theory of the mind, using the metaphor of a
computer’s hardware and software. Expand the metaphor in detail, using an
example of some software with which you are familiar.

Using the software versus hardware metaphor, assess the effectiveness of
functionalism as a theory of the mind.

What might Fodor mean by describing functionalism as ‘neither dualist nor
materialist’?

In what ways might functionalism be an appealing theory for the field of
psychology? Why might psychologists prefer it to eliminativism?

Outline how functionalism would explain ‘folk psychology’, using examples of
propositional attitudes.

7

138

Jerry Fodor, ‘The Mind-Body Problem’ (1981), http://www.lscp.net/persons/dupoux/teaching/
QUINZAINE_RENTREE_CogMaster_2010-11/Bloc_philo/Fodor_1981_mind_body_problem.pdf
(accessed July 30, 2013)

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Metaphysics

139

=== Problems for Identity Theory ===

Problems for Identity Theory: Leibniz’ Principle and Multiple Realization
Excerpt edited from: Ian Ravenscroft, A Beginner’s Guide to Philosophy of Mind

Leibniz’ Principle or the Principle of the Indiscernibility of Identicals.

The mathematical principle of the ‘indiscernibility of identicals’ says that if X and Y are identical, then
they have all their properties in common. When we say ‘identical’, we mean ‘exactly the same’. For
example: Sally is identical to the tallest person in the room. In that case, Sally must be the tallest
person in the room.

Now, because they are identical (meaning exactly the same), if Sally has the property of an IQ of 175,
so does the tallest person in the room; and if the tallest person in the room has the property of owning
a Harley Davidson, so does Sally. For two things to be identical, they cannot differ in any way.

Leibniz’ principle also applies to “types” of things. For example, the type ‘water’ is identical to the type
‘H2O’. If water boils at 100 Celsius, so does H2O; and if H2O conducts electricity, so does water.

So if, as the Identity Theorist claims, pain is identical to a specific type of brain activity, then every
property of pain must also be a property of that brain activity. This means that if we find a property of
pain which cannot be a property of that brain activity then they are not identical, and Identity Theory is
proven false.

Now, all pain has a property which is definitively part of its experience: it hurts. This is the property we
will focus on for the next section.

Multiple Realization: humans, animals, and potentially artificial intelligences might all experience pain,
but the physical processes causing this pain could be quite different. So, if those physical processes of
pain are all different, then how can they all share the same property of feeling hurt?

Let's agree that, for the sake of argument, in humans’ pain is a unique part of our brain responding.
Now, we can easily imagine animals with brains quite different from our own. Let's agree, again for the
sake of argument, that squid have brains quite different from our own and lack that part of the brain
which we use to respond to pain (This isn't at all implausible. The squid brain is very different from our
own. From an evolutionary perspective, humans and squid are only very distantly related.)

So far, we have assumed only that squid don't have that human part of the brain. It seems quite likely,
though, that they experience pain that hurts (or at least we have no good reasons to doubt that they
can be in pain). Consequently, the identity theory is in trouble: if squid can lack that part of the brain but
feel pain that has the property of hurting, then it cannot be the case that pain is identical to a specific
type of brain activity.

This poses a serious challenge to the Identity Theory. If pain can be realised in different ways across
different physical systems (i.e., different brain structures or even non-biological systems), then pain
cannot be identical to one specific type of brain activity. In other words, if pain (a mental state) can have
properties that are not shared by a specific type of brain activity (a physical state), then according to
Leibniz’s Principle, they cannot be identical. Thus, Multiple Realization suggests that mental states are
more than just physical processes and cannot be fully explained by them.

NOTE TO LEXIE: Functionalism, however, suggests that ‘pain’ and ‘feeling hurt’ are both merely
processes which function to detect injury. For the Functionalist, it doesn’t matter if ‘feeling hurt’ is
different for everyone/every species: it retains the same function.

However, while Functionalism can explain how different physical states can experience functionally
similar mental states, it is extremely limited in how it can explain the properties of the mind.

=== Dualism ===

Dualism

What is appealing about dualism? Why would people believe in this split between the
non-physical mind and the physical body?

Let’s start with the basics: how do you know that you are not dreaming right now?

See... We might only believe our bodies are real while, in fact, we are actually just a
brain on a bench that someone else is prodding with electrodes, simulating the
physical reality that we perceive. There is no way of knowing. We can say that the
physical world is 99.99999% likely to be real, but we can never say with 100%
certainty that it is.

However... It is not an illusion to say that we are experiencing our thoughts. The
existence of your mind is irrefutably proven by your experience of your thoughts. We
cannot be certain about the rest of existence, but the fact that you are thinking right
now means that we can say with 100% certainty that the conscious entity that is you
is real.

So, where does that leave us? Our minds = 100% real. The rest of reality =
99.999999% likely to be real.

The attraction of Dualism can be summarised like this: we cannot prove the body,
but we cannot refute the mind.

The Non-Physical Mind

Everything up until now hopefully makes rational sense: we are 100% certain that
our minds exist because we are thinking, and we could only be thinking if our minds
exist. However, we cannot prove anything else exists because there is a tiny, tiny,
tiny chance that it could all be a trick.

Let's pretend that we are living in that 0.000001% chance that the rest of the world is
all a trick. It turns out that your brain is actually on a bench somewhere and what you
think is real is actually a stray cat licking your frontal lobe, causing you to hallucinate
reality. Everything in this world that you know and love is actually just the saliva from
little Mitsy's tongue, dripping down your neural pathways.

Well, if that's the case, then the dualist has cause for celebration! They were right!
Your mind MUST exist in a way that nothing else does. Why? Well, now that we
know that your brain is on a table being licked by a cat, the same logic applies as
before: there's a 0.000001% chance THAT'S just an illusion, too.

So, the Dualist says, nothing physical is 100% certain to exist. However, because
you are thinking then you can be 100% certain that your mind exists.. But what is
your mind? If it’s physical, like your brain, then we cannot be certain it exists. But we
know for a fact that your mind definitely does exist. Therefore, the dualist says, your
mind must be non-physical!

Problem solved!

How Do You Touch Something That Doesn’t Exist?


Before you log off your computer and try to figure out a way of getting Mitsy to lick
the part of your brain which simulates unlimited pogs, or whatever it is that you kids
collect these days, I'm afraid there is a problem: if your thoughts are non-physical,
then how could they influence your physical behaviour?

The Dualist has a philosophy-breaking problem here: we can't say that our thoughts
are non-physical but at some point they become physical. As silly as this all might
sound, we’re not dealing with science fiction right now, we’re legitimately trying to
understand what the difference is between our minds and the rest of the world. It
doesn’t make sense to have something non-physical that is physically influential. We
can go a step further, even: it doesn’t really make sense to say that something non-
physical exists!

The word 'physical' refers to properties we can measure: mass, energy, wavelength,
frequency, etc. The phrase ‘non-physical’ is getting away with a pretty outrageous
claim at the moment: how can something that does not physically exist be said to
exist at all? It makes much more sense to simply say that everything that exists is
physical.

On the other hand, the dualist cannot abandon the idea that our thoughts are non-
physical: the whole point is that anything physical could simply be a dream or an
illusion. If our minds are also physical then they might not be real. But we know our
minds are real because we're thinking!

At this point, it seems we need to admit that dualism is illogical. However, with their
dying breath, the dualist whispers to us to remember their initial point: your mind is
the only thing that 100% definitely exists. That your mind exists is the only thing that
you can know for absolute certain: that is the philosophical legacy of dualism.

Dualism might be a load of rubbish, but it has proven one thing that remains true to
this day: the only thing that you can know for 100% certain is that your mind exists.
Everything else might be a lie, but if you are thinking then you are existing.

The physicalist says this:

Physicalism

Mental states depend on physical states. To put it more firmly: mental states are
physical states. There is nothing about the mind that cannot be understood through a
physical explanation. Or so they say.

Unlike the dualist, the physicalist is not interested in making you doubt your own
thoughts. The physicalist just says that your brain is physical and therefore your
thoughts are physical. Our thoughts and personalities are an influential cocktail of
genetics, chemicals, electricity, and well-trodden neural pathways.

Let’s Clone You

Imagine that I have developed an advanced cloning machine using the money I
receive from my high school teacher salary.

Now, imagine that you have consented to being put into that cloning machine. You



go in and after a few seconds there is a very hot, bright, green light that seems to go
right through you. A sound, like a glitching video, surrounds you as the machine
envelopes you, copying all the information from the deepest recesses of your mind
and body.

My cloning machine perfectly replicates every single atom of you.

The other side of the machine cracks open: your clone is ready!

The question is: who comes out? The physicalist proudly says that it is a perfect
copy of you in every single way. Everything is physical and, if my machine perfectly
copied every single detail of your physical information, then what comes out is a
perfect copy of you.

One issue, though... What about the 'you' bit of you? If everything is physical, then
will your consciousness be replicated in the clone as well? If so, will you be able to
feel both bodies at once?

That seems unlikely. What seems more likely is that the new version of you will be
indiscernibly you, even to them. But... It won't be you, will it? It will be a copy of you,
with fake memories from a history they never experienced. Let’s pretend you broke
your arm when you were a kid and now you can’t bend it properly. Well, they can’t
either: except they never broke their arm. They only think that happened to them. But
it didn’t. It happened to you.

So, even though they are a perfect copy of you they are not actually you… So,
they’re not a perfect copy of you? How do we make a perfect copy of you, then?

The Problem of ‘Hard Consciousness’

There's a much bigger problem here for the physicalist than it seems, one that the
dualist never had to worry about: 'Hard Consciousness'.

Your consciousness, the bit of you that is thinking and feeling as you’re reading this,
doesn’t seem to be able to be copied or moved. When we say 'hard consciousness',
we mean the bit of you that can currently say 'I am thinking and therefore I exist'. It
seems like, no matter what we do, that part of you that is really and truly you, who is
reading this right now, cannot be copied. But if we cannot clone your consciousness,
then… is it physical?

Hold on hold on, let’s just all calm down. Perhaps we could say that, if we perfectly
cloned you, you would start experiencing both minds at once. That seems unlikely,
but then again so does perfect cloning! Let’s imagine that we perfectly clone you,
consciousness and all. You wake up in a second body, while still experiencing your
current body. You’ve got two brains and two bodies now and it’s sort of hard, but it
also somehow works.

Well, wait a second, now we have the old non-physical problem again—how are your
two minds linked? No, this is starting to get a bit weird.

It seems more likely that your clone will have a copy of your mind. They will be you,
for now, but over time they will gradually become their own, unique, version of you.


But then, of course, they’re not a perfect copy, are they? Your clone is actually a
brand-new person with a brand-new consciousness that has never existed before.

So, we ask the physicalist: if everything is physical, then why does it seem like
consciousness has properties that no other physical thing has?

It might surprise you to discover, but nobody knows the answer to this question. The
problem of 'hard consciousness' is still unanswered in all of neuroscience.

Want to know more? Look up, ‘Qualia.’

=== Materialism — its appeal ===

oS

a |

must

The Appeal of Materialism

The view of materialism describes everything in the world in terms of physical objects.
Materialists deny views, such as Descartes’, that there are any things that cannot be accounted
for in physical terms. For the materialist, the word ‘mind’ refers to nothing more than the brain.
For the materialist, it is the physical matter in our heads — including all its complex hormonal
chemistry and electrical activity — that is responsible for all our thoughts and feelings. Therefore
it follows that the human self is to be identified with their body.

DISCUSS

Consider the following examples in small groups. How would they constitute a
materialist argument against Descartes? How might Descartes defend his substance
dualism in the face of these examples?

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

When electrical shocks are applied to the brain, the personality can be
dramatically affected.

A person who suffers brain damage is no longer the same. In severe cases, he or
she will not even seem to be a person at all, but just a living body devoid of any
attributes of mind.

Robots are becoming increasingly intelligent and exhibit many of the attributes
we might consider to be ‘thinking’.

Certain vitamins and drugs have effects on people’s moods and thoughts.
‘There is the famous case of the man named Phineas Gage (a Google search will
yield many results), whose railway accident forced an iron rod right through
his skull. Gage remarkably survived the accident, but his character underwent
a dramatic change. His gentle, ethically upright and considerate nature
transformed to snappy, rude, slovenly and untrustworthy behaviour, making
him unrecognisable to his family in all but his physical appearance.

In contemporary philosophy the materialist view is overwhelmingly favoured, as you will gather
from the studies which follow, of various seminal twentieth century texts. In the meantime, we
will consider some of the reasons why materialism has become the mainstream view of the mind
— at least in scientific communities.

The field of neuroscience — the scientific study of the brain and nervous system — has expanded
enormously over the last hundred years or so, vastly increasing its knoweldge base and making
use of ever-more sophisticated technology. Neuroscientists continue to demonstrate links between
specific parts of the brain and our mental functions. Areas of the brain used in such processes
as language, numeracy, creativity and humour have been located. Experiments have shown that
when surgery deliberately damages a particular site in a monkey’s brain, the precise nature of the
mental changes in the monkey can be predicted. Scientific developments are increasingly able
to describe our mental lives in terms of the same cause and effect patterns demonstrated in the
physical world. All of this challenges the dualist’s conviction that mind and brain are separate
substances.

Further, the material mind can be argued for on the basis of our biological development. Humans
start life as single cells, which then divide, redivide and so on. Physical processes such as nutrition
enable the foetus to continue growing into a baby capable of existing outside the womb. So at
what point, asks the materialist, does a non-physical element become apparent or necessary
in this story? The same question arises if we consider our development from an evolutionary
perspective. Our species evolved over millions of years from single-celled organisms, through
simple vertebrates, fish, reptiles, mammals and then from the great apes. Have all of these species
had a non-physical soul or mind? Or only humans? It remains difficult to discern at what point in
evolution a non-physical element could have intervened in the process of physical development,
and how and why such a mysterious element could have done this. From a physicist’s point of view,
energies cannot be created from nowhere without violating the fundamental law of conservation.

For some, the dualist argument just seems far too complicated. It is surely a whole lot simpler,
argue many materialists, to simply accept that there is one substance, and that is physical. Why
argue for this additional, spooky, ethereal substance if we can explain the mental world without
it? This is based on the principle of Ockham’s Razor - the idea that the simplest explanation is
usually the best — named after William of Ockham (1288-1347). Translated more literally it is
the principle that ‘entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity.’ This idea has been held
as a basic rule of thumb by numerous philosophers and scientists over the centuries and the
Australian philosopher J.J.C.Smart has used it to argue against dualism.

The physical realm is certainly, in many ways, much easier for us to attempt to describe and
explain. Fields such as neuroscience, psychiatry and psychology routinely assume materialism,
holding open the hope that science will one day be able to fully explain the workings of the
human mind in terms of the causal patterns that govern our physical world. We have a long way
to go in this; the vast majority of the brain and our mental lives are still out of reach of scientific
explanation. But if we are one day able to entirely define, describe and account for all aspects of
the mind in physical terms, the dualism/materialism debate may be over.

124

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Metaphysics

125

=== Simulation Theory (lecture slides) ===

--- Slide 1 ---
Are We Living in a Simulation?
What Would it Mean if the Answer is Yes?

--- Slide 2 ---
Think About This…
We’re going to watch two videos that ask you to question reality.
Write down the first things that pop into your head as you watch.
There are no right answers, just write down everything you think of.

--- Slide 5 ---
Questions:
Do you agree or disagree with Musk: Are we living in a simulation?

If yes, why?

If no, what evidence do you have to prove that this is “face reality”?

--- Slide 6 ---
Compile Evidence
Write down a list of reasons why we could be living in a simulation and a list of reasons why we can’t be.

Which list is more compelling? Why?

--- Slide 7 ---
Consider…
Choose one of the following prompts on the next slides.
Take 10 – 15 minutes to write about it.

--- Slide 8 ---
PROMPT #1
Assume that we are, in fact, living in a computer simulation. Do our actions have consequences? Why or why not? How would you change the way you live your life given this knowledge?

--- Slide 9 ---
PROMPT #2
You have just built the world’s best running supercomputer/virtual reality system and all the gaming companies are looking to you to make the next big game.
What would you design? Would you ever want to make a simulation of reality so complete it was indistinguishable from the real thing? Why or why not?

--- Slide 10 ---
PROMPT #3
There’s a new virtual reality game so detailed and complete, it is rumoured to feel just like real life. You get this system as a birthday present and discover the rumours are true!
You can even eat food in this game and taste the flavours. The virtual world is much more peaceful and enjoyable than the real world is. Would you ever leave the game? Why or why not?

--- Slide 11 ---
PROMPT #4
Would knowing that you live in a simulation change your experience of playing video games? Do you think it's possible that the characters in them are real?

--- Slide 12 ---
Reflect 1:
Break into small groups and talk about your opinions on life being a simulation.
Do other people’s opinions differ from yours?
What types of evidence do you both have to support your points?

--- Slide 13 ---
Reflect
What do you think: Is this all real, or is life as we know it just a simulation?

And does that really matter?

Would knowing the absolute answer change the way you live your life?

--- Slide 14 ---
Simulation Theory - Nick Bostrom (2003)
Future generations will have immensely more powerful computers that we have currently.

Mega computers that can run multiple, detailed, simulations of their ancestors.

In these simulations, being have a sort of ‘artificial consciousness’.

--- Slide 15 ---
Simulation Theory - Nick Bostrom (2003)
Is it likely that this technology will one day exist?

--- Slide 16 ---
Simulation Theory - Nick Bostrom (2003)
If so, it is more likely that we are currently in such a simulation than not?

--- Slide 17 ---
Simulation Theory
David Chalmers asks: if this is correct, who could be the higher being that is responsible for designing our hyper-realistic simulation?
He describes this being as a “programmer in the next universe up”.
“They might just be a teenager,” suggests Chalmers, “hacking on a computer and running five universes in the background … But it might be someone who is nonetheless omniscient, all-knowing and all-powerful about our world.”

--- Slide 18 ---
How is ‘Reality’ Defined?
The metaphysical scenario of Simulation Theory refers to something which philosophers have discussed for centuries: how do we know if what we’re seeing is ‘real’?
Rizwan Virk writes: “the findings of quantum physics may shed some doubt on the fact that the material universe is real. The more that scientists look for the ‘material’ in the material world, the more they find that it doesn’t exist.”

--- Slide 19 ---
How is ‘Reality’ Defined?
Physicist John Wheeler, a colleague of Albert Einstein, wrote that Physics as a field has evolved from the Newtonian idea that “everything is a particle” to the Quantum theory that “everything is information.”
“It from bit” is the phrase, meaning everything is based on information.
Even the definition of a particle in Quantum Physics is “kind of fuzzy”

--- Slide 20 ---
How is ‘Reality’ Defined? Physicist David Bohm:
Reality is what is true.
What is true is what we believe.
We believe what we perceive.
We perceive what we pay attention to.
We pay attention to what we think about.
We think about what we perceive
What we perceive determines what we believe.
What we believe determines what is true.
What is true is our reality.

--- Slide 21 ---
Elon Musk says:

--- Slide 22 ---
What is true? Elon Musk:
If not now, then one day what is true will be the beliefs of simulated brains and nervous system in a simulated world.
Musk says the odds that we’re the very first people to develop that technology is “one in billions.”
This is because, as soon as those simulations start, there will be countless trillions upon trillions of simulated people living in simulated worlds.

--- Slide 24 ---
Objections
What are some objections to this idea?

--- Slide 25 ---
Objections
What are the limits of computing powers?
Are there limits?

--- Slide 26 ---
Objections
Paul Davies says “Mathematicians have proved that a universal computing machine can create an artificial world that is itself capable of simulating its own world, and so on ad infinitum.
In other words, simulations nest inside simulations inside simulations,”
“Because fake worlds can outnumber real ones without restriction, the ‘real’ multiverse would inevitably spawn a vastly greater number of virtual multiverses.”

--- Slide 27 ---
Objection: Harvard University physicist Lisa Randall
“It’s just not based on well-defined probabilities,” Randall said.
“The argument says you’d have lots of things that want to simulate us. I actually have a problem with that.
We mostly are interested in ourselves. Why simulate us? I mean, there’s so many things to be simulating. … I don’t know why this higher species would want to bother with us.”

--- Slide 28 ---
Objection: Harvard University physicist Lisa Randall
“It’s just not based on well-defined probabilities,” Randall said.
“The argument says you’d have lots of things that want to simulate us. I actually have a problem with that.
We mostly are interested in ourselves. Why simulate us? I mean, there’s so many things to be simulating. … I don’t know why this higher species would want to bother with us.”

--- Slide 29 ---
Final Exercise:
Write down the most compelling argument for why we are living in a simulation.

Write down the most compelling argument for why we are not living in a simulation.

Write down which you agree with, and why.

You are now ready to start your Issues Study!

=== What is a Human Being? (lecture slides) ===

--- Slide 1 ---
What is a Human Being?
Is humanity purely biological? Or are there other components to being human?

--- Slide 3 ---
Write down your answers to this:
What is a human being?

What defines a human being as fully human?

Is being human merely a biological definition, or something more?

--- Slide 4 ---
SHARE/DISCUSS
Discuss each of your answers with the people nearest to you.

--- Slide 5 ---
Theories of Personhood

--- Slide 6 ---
Questions to start
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
6
What is different about you now than when you were a one-year-old?
How about when you were a12-year-old?
Will you be the same person when you are 80 years old?

--- Slide 7 ---
Overview
Context
The reason we should study personhood.
Genetic Criteria
A legal argument for personhood.
Cognitive Criteria
The argument for five criteria for cognitive personhood.
Social Criterion
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
7
The argument that personhood is defined by societal recognition.
Sentience Theory
The argument that personhood is defined by self-awareness.

--- Slide 8 ---
Context
Personhood is a moral term
If we grant something ‘personhood’ then we agree to meaningfully consider their rights like people.

Personhood is at the centre of social issues like:
The Death Penalty
Abortion
Animal Rights
Artificial Intelligence

Why?
Pitch deck title
8

--- Slide 9 ---
How To Define Personhood
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
9
We will now look through five different ways that people have argued we should define personhood.
Each of these ways can be used to think about any of those social issues.

--- Slide 10 ---
The Genetic Criterion
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
10
P1: Only those granted personhood are entitled to moral and legal rights.
P2: Personhood is reserved for humans.
P3: Every human has human DNA, and only humans have human DNA.
Conclusion: So long as you have human DNA you are entitled to all the moral and legal rights of personhood.
The ‘Genetic Criterion’ is famously attributed to Judge John Noonan (1926-2017)
Noonan served as a federal judge in the United States for thirty years.
Known for his philosophy of personhood.
Notably, his views are shaped by his Catholic faith and his education in law and philosophy.
His criterion was primarily designed to think about Abortion law.

--- Slide 11 ---
Cognitive Criteria
Mary Anne Warren (1946-2010)
American philosopher who specialised in personhood.
Like Noonan, Warren was primarily concerned with the abortion debate.
She was pro-choice and opposed to the Genetic Criterion.
She identified five criteria that about personhood:
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
11
Consciousness – Defined as the capacity to experience emotions and sensations.
Reason – Defined as the ability to process complex problems.
Self-Motivated Activity – Deciding to act based on a conscious decision.
Communication – The ability to communicate ‘by whatever means’ on a variety of topics.
Self-Awareness – Recognising oneself as an individual and/or member of a group.

--- Slide 12 ---
Cognitive Criteria
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
12
Not all of Warren’s criteria are required to qualify for personhood.
1, 2, and 3 might be sufficient (consciousness, reasoning, self-motivated activity).
For example, we might lose the capacity to communicate, but we would still retain personhood.
Mary Anne Warren (1946-2010)

--- Slide 13 ---
Cognitive Criteria
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
13
"We needn't suppose that an entity must have all of these attributes to be properly considered a person; (1) and (2) alone may well be sufficient for personhood, and quite probable (1) - (3) are sufficient. Neither do we need to insist that any one of these criteria is necessary for personhood, although once again (1) and (2) look like fairly good candidates for necessary conditions, as does (3), if 'actively' is construed so as to include the activity of reasoning."
Mary Anne Warren (1946-2010)

--- Slide 14 ---
Cognitive Criteria
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
14
Warren qualifies that her definition is “species neutral”, writing:

“…it leaves room for the logical possibility that there can be persons that are not human beings, or human beings that are not persons. What makes a being a person, on this definition, is not its biological humanity, but its intelligence, and its capacity for thought, reason, reflection and self-awareness.”
Mary Anne Warren (1946-2010)

--- Slide 15 ---
Social Criterion
Many philosophers, including Charles Taylor (1931-)
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
15
You are a person when society recognises you as a person, or when someone cares about you.

Q: 1. What are some strengths of this view?
Q: 2. What are some limitations of this view?

--- Slide 16 ---
Sentience Theory
Peter Singer (1946-)
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
16
Personhood relies on sentience: the ability to feel pleasure and pain
We cannot exclude non-humans from moral consideration, because they can suffer like humans
Acknowledges that differences between individual members of different species may be morally relevant in determining how we treat them
But we cannot simply mistreat animals because they do not have human membership

--- Slide 17 ---
Gradient Theory
American Zoologist Charles Manning Child (1869-1954)
7/1/20XX
Pitch deck title
17
Personhood comes in degrees - you can have more or less personhood E.g. the development of a foetus
Can be gradually lost or gradually gained
Some believe that personhood is forfeited when you greatly violate the laws of society through Inhumane actions (this is an argument for the death penalty)

=== Ravenscroft — The Identity Theory ===

3
The identity theory
If you gave him a brain cell it'd be lonely.
-Old Australian insult
Very roughly, the identity theory asserts that the mind is the brain. More precisely,
it claims that mental states are physical states of the brain. The qualification
'physical' is important. After all, property dualism asserts that mental states are
properties ot the brain (see Section 1 .4) . However, according to property dualism,
mental states are nonphysical properties of the brain. Consequently, if the identity
theory is to be distinct from property dualism, it must assert that mental states are
physical states of the brain. For ease of expression, in this chapter I will simply say
'brain states' rather than 'physical states of the brain'. It is important to remember,
though, that it is physical brain states that are being discussed.
The identity theory gets its name because it identifies-claims an identity
between-mental states and certain brain states. I sa y 'certain' brain states because
whilst the identity theory claims that every mental state is a brain state, it is not
committed to the converse. In fact, it's certa inly not the case that every brain state
is a mental state. For example, in addition to billions of neurons, the human brain
contains a large number of glial cells which play a supportive and protective role.
It's unlikely that any mental state is identical with a state ot one or more glial cells.
3.1
More about the identity theory
The idea that mental states are brain states is not new. The English philosopher
Thomas Hobbes ( 1 588-1 679) and his French contemporary Pierre Gassendi
( I 5 92- 1 6 5 5 ) both made the claim more than three hundred years ago. However,
the idea wasn't carefully expressed and defended until the 1 9 50s when a group of
A u stralian philosophers including J. J. C . Smart explored the idea.
These days the idea of mind-brain identity is commonplace . Indeed, it has crept
i n t o o rd i n a ry la nguage with expressions like 'He's brainy' and 'I can't get my head
,Hou n d i t ' . Howl'ver, when the idea was proposed back in the 1 950s, it was

----- page break -----

40 I P H I L O S O P H Y O F M I N D
ridiculed. One English philosopher 'went so far as to suggest that Smart must
have spent too much time in the hot Australian sun! (l owe this story to
David Armstrong. )
When Smart articulated the identity theory h e used a couple o f analogies to
convey his claim that mental states are brain states. According to Smart. mental
states are brain states in the same way that water is H20 and lightning is an
atmospheric electrical discharge. These analogies are important for two reasons.
First. Smart's analogies are cases in which it took considerable scientific
investigation to make the identifications. That water is H20 cannot be established
by casual observation, nor by thinking about the meanings of the terms 'water'
and 'H20'. Similarly, the claim that mental states are brain states is not supposed
to be an obvious truth which can be established by simple observation or by
reflecting on the meanings of expressions like 'belief' and 'cortex'. (The cortex is a
part of the human brain.) Rather, the claim that mental states are brain states is
plausible in part because of advances in our understanding of the human brain.
In order to grasp the second reason why Smart's analogies are significant we
need to understand the important distinction between


 tokens and types. Let's
begin with an example.
Dingoes are a kind of wild dog found in many parts of the Australian outback.
Say that we are camping in the outback and see four dingoes prowling 'around our
campfire. In that case we have four tokens of the type dingo. Thel tokens are the
individual animals; the type is the kind or class to which the individuals b..clQng.
Notice that the four dingo tokens belong to a great many other types besides the
type dingo. For example, they are tokens of the types mammal, animal, material
object, and scary thing which prowls around the campfire.
Here's another example of the type/token distinction. On my bookshelf are two
copies of Newton-Smith's nice book about the philosophy of science. One I bought
for myself; the other was given to me by a friend. So on my shelf I have two tokens
of the type Newton-Smith 's nice book about the philosophy of science.
Now that we have in place the distinction between tokens and types, we can make
a further distinction between token identity and type identity. Some examples
will be useful. Posh Spice used to be a member of the British pop band The Spice Girls.
After she left the band she married English soccer star David Beckham and now
calls herself 'Victoria Beckham'. If you are invited to a party by Posh Spice you have
simultaneously been invited to a party by Victoria Beckham, ?osh Spice and Victoria
Bl'l'kham are one and the same person. They are token identical. Similarly, the
1'1 I 1Tl'llt President of the United States is George W. Bush. If you are invited
I t ) I III' Whitl' House by the current President you have simultaneously been invited to
I III' Whlll' "OUSl' hy George W. Bush. George W. Bush and the current President
ol l h,' U l l lh'lI SI.lll'S arl' one and the same person. They a re tokl'Jl i(il'Jll il'al .

----- page break -----

THE ID ENTITY TH E O R Y I 4 1
In contrast, the identities between water and H20, and between lightning and
atmospheric electrical discharge, are type identities. Every token of the type water is a
token of the type H20, and every token of the type lightning is a token of the type
atmospheric electrical discharge. Science has discovered that the type water and
the type H20 are identical. as are the types lightning and atmospheric electrical discharge.
We are now in a position to clarify the kind of identity which identity theorists
want to assert between brain states and mental states. According to the identity
theory, there is a type identity between mental states and brain states. For
example, every token of the type pain is a token of the type c-fiber firing.
Consequently, there is a type identity between pain and c-fiber firing. (I will often
use the example 'pain is c-fiber firing' to illustrate the identity theory. This is a
common practice in the philosophy of mind, but is not intended to be taken very
seriously. There are nerve fibers called 'c-fibers' and they have something to do
with painful sensations. However, it is unlikely that pain is identical to that
particular type of neurological state. Moreover, whilst I will sometimes describe
c-fiber firings as 'brain states', c-fibers are in fact peripheral nerves.)
Summing up, the identity theory asserts that every type of mental state is
identical to a type of brain state. (It is not committed, though, to the converse. )
The brain states in question are physical states of the brain: " Moreover, the
identities ar


e not supposed to be discoverable by either simple observation or
examining the meanings of the terms involved. Rather, they are analogous to
scientific identities like 'water is H20'.
3.2
Arguments in favor of the identity theory
How well does the identity theory explain the six features of mental states noted
in the Introduction? It's fair to say that the identity theory offers convincing
explanations of three of the six features, and that it may turn out to be compatible
with sophisticated attempts to explain two of the remaining features. However,
one feature of mental states-consciousness-presents a serious challenge to the
identity theory. In this section we will discuss those features of mental states
which the identity theory, or a theory compatible with it. can explain. In the next
section we will touch on, amongst other things, the issue of consciousness. A fuller
discussion of consciousness will have to wait until Part 4. In what follows I have
retained the numbering used in the Introduction.
1 . Some mental states are caused by states of the world. Example: Bloggs's belief that
there is a cup of coffee in front of him (mental state) is caused by there being a
ClIJl of l'Ol'ke in front of him (state of the world) .

----- page break -----

42 I P HILO S O PH Y O F MIND
If, as the identity theory claims, mental states are brain states, then the first
feature amounts to the claim that some brain states (the ones held by the identity
theory to be identical with certain mental states) are caused by states of the world.
Research in neuroscience gives us grounds for thinking that this is true. For
example, the causal impact of seeing a cup of coffee can be traced deep into the
brain. Light from the cup stimulates the light-sensitive cells at the back of the eye
(the retina), and information about the pattern of stimulation on the retina is
carried into the brain by the optic nerve. (Intriguingly, the pattern of activation on
the retina is reproduced many times in the visual centers of the brain. )
2. Some mental states cause actions. Example: Bloggs's desire for another coffee
(mental state) together with his belief that there is more coffee in the kitchen
(mental state), caused him to go into the kitchen (action) .
I f the identity theory i s t o explain the second feature o f mental states, i t must
be the case that certain brain states cause actions like going to the kitchen for a
coffee. Research in neuroscience makes it overwhelmingly likely that this is the
case. We have very good evidence that actions are caused by activity in a part of
the brain called the motor cortex.
3 . Some mental states cause other mental states. Example: Bloggs's belief that it's Friday
(mental state), together with his belief that Friday is payday (mental state),
caused him to believe that it's payday (mental state) .
If, a s the identity theory insists, mental states are brain states, then the claim
that some mental states cause other mental states is supported by the fact that
some brain states cause other brain states. However, as we noted in the
Introduction, there is something special about the way mental states interact
with each other. Notice that my belief that it was Friday, together with my belief
that Friday is payday, give me good reason to believe that it's payday. To put this
point another way: the causal relations between mental states often respect the
rational relations bet


ween them. In Chapter 6 we will look in a little detail at one
theory of the rationality of thought. That theory is a physicalist one, and to that
extent is compatible with the identity theory. However, it is controversial whether
that account of the rationality of thought can be squared with the claim that
mental states are brain states.
';. Some mental states are about things in the world. That is, they represent the world as
hei llg a certain way. For example, Bloggs's belief that Mt Everest is 8,848 meterS
t ., 1 1 Is ,,"out Mt Everest and represents Mt Everest as being 8,848 meters tall. In
( : I "'ptt'r <) Wl' will look at a range of theories of mental representat ioll which a re
I l I t I.ll l l y m l l l i lol l ihk with the iden t ity theory.

----- page break -----

T H E I D E NTITY T H E O R Y I 43
6. Some kinds of mental states are systematically correlated with certain kinds of brain
states. According to the identity theory, mental states literally are brain states.
Consequently, the identity theory smoothly explains the systematic correlation
of mental states with brain states.
In the next section I briefly describe a historical case which strikingly illustrates
the existence of mind-brain correlations.
3.3
Evidence from deficit studies
Deficit studies provide particularly striking evidence of mind-brain correlations. In
a deficit study neuroscientists attempt to determine the function of a part of the
brain by examining subjects who, due to brain damage, have lost a particular
mental function. A great many mind-brain correlations have been explored in this
way. In what follows I will sketch j ust one example to give the flavor of this
research.
The 1 840s was a period of great expansion of the American railway system. In
those days construction teams relied on gunpowder to help clear away rock.
A hole was drilled into the rock and a fuse inserted. The hole was then packed with
gunpowder and the fuse lit. Everybody ran as fast and as far as possible before the
gunpowder exploded. Finally, the rubble was cleared away by hand and the whole
process repeated.
Phineas Gage was a highly responsible leader of a railway construction team. It
was his job to carefully pack down the gunpowder before lighting the fuse-a
process called 'tamping'. Gage had his own iron 'tamping rod' made. Now in a
museum, it was j ust over a meter long and weighed around 6 kg. One end-the
end inserted into the hole-was flat; the other pointed.
One day there was a terrible accident. It seems that Gage's tamping rod struck a
spark from the wall of the hole, setting off the gunpowder prematurely. The rod,
pointed end first, passed through Gage's left cheek and the front part of his brain
( crucially, the prefrontal cortices), before exiting through the top of his skull.
It was subsequently found some distance away. Incredibly, Gage survived. His
personality was, however, drastically altered. Prior to the accident he was
described as 'efficient and capable' ( Damasio 1 994: 4); after the accident he
was careless and irresponsible. 'Gage', his friends observed, 'was no longer Gage'
( Damasio 1 994: 8 ) . He could no longer hold down his job as team leader and began
to d rink heavily. He died in San Francisco at the age of thirty-eight.
Thc t ragic case of Phineas Gage provides striking evidence of a correlation
Ill't Wl'l'1l a
1ll l'll t a l process-impulse control-and a part of the brain-the
prdro n


t 'l l ("( ) rt in's. W h i lst Smart and his fellow identity theorists didn't know

----- page break -----

44 I P H I L O S O P H Y O F M I N D
enough about the brain to predict the details of that particular correlation, cases
like Gage's provide important support for their view.
3.4
Arguments against the identity theory
There are two important ways of arguing against the identity theory. The first way
appeals to Leibniz's principle of the indiscernibility of identicals; the second
involves the distinction between type identity and token identity. As we might
expect, consciousness is a difficult problem for the identity theory; it will be
discussed in the context of Leibniz's principle of the indiscernibiIity of identicals.
1. Arguments based on Leibniz's principle. As we saw in Section 1.2, Leibniz's principle of
the indiscernibility of identicals says that if X and Y are identical, then they have all
their properties in common. Example: say that Sally is the tallest person in the room.
In that case, if Sally has an IQ of 1 7 5, so does the tallest person in the room; and if the
tallest person in the room rides a Harley Davidson, so does Sally.
The example just given involves a case of token identity: Sally and the tallest
person in the room are one and the same individual. However, Leibniz's principle
also applies to types. For example, the type water is identical to the type H20. So if
water boils at 1 00 degrees Celsius, so does H20; and if H20 conducts electricity, so
does water. Similarly if, as the identity theorist claims, pain is c-fiber firing, then
any property of pain is a property of c-fiber firing, and vice versa. Consequently, if
we can locate a property of pain which is not a property of c-fiber firing, or a
property of c-fiber firing which is not a property of pain, then we will have proven
the identity theory false.
Various suggestions have been made of properties which pain has but c-fiber
firing does not, or vice versa. For example, my pain has the property of being
located in my foot, whereas my c-fiber firing does not; my pain is sharp but c-fiber
firings are neither sharp nor dull; and my c-fiber firing has a frequency (say 20
firings per second) whereas my pain has no frequency. Since my pain and my
c-fiber firings have different properties, they cannot be identical. Consequently,
the identity theory is false.
Let's take each of these examples in turn.
(i) My pain is in my foot but my c-fiber firing is not. In reply, the identity theorist can
insist that, strictly speaking, my pain is not in my foot. The brain state which is ident
Il'01I 10 my pain is in my head. Rather than talk about a pain in my foot we should talk
.lhOIiI having a pain of the in-the-foot kind. One state of my brain--call it 'B 1 '-is
hlt'l Illl'1ll 10 my having a pain of the in-the-foot kind; another state of my brain
call it '1I2'-ls Idt'ntk'al to my having a pain of the in-the-hand kind; and so on.

----- page break -----

T H E I D E NTITY TH E O R Y I 45
The identity theorist's reply gains in plausibility when we reflect on the
phenomenon of phantom pains. Some unfortunate folk who have lost a body part
continue to feel pain which they say is in the missing part. For example, it is not
uncommon for people who have had a foot amputated to experience what they
call a pain in their foot. These pains can be excruciating, and are very difficult to
treat. Now it's clear that there is no pa


in located in their foot for the simple reason
that they have no foot. Rather, they have a brain state of the kind we earlier called
'B 1 '-a brain state identical to having a pain of the in-thc-foot kind.
(ii) My pain is sharp but nothing in my brain is sharp. This argument takes too literally
the expression 'sharp' in 'sharp pain'. Clearly, the expression is metaphorical.
To have a sharp pain is to have a pain which feels a certain way-it is not to have
a knife-like pain. The identity theorist can say that pains of the sharp kind are
identical to a certain kind of brain state, whereas pains of the throbbing kind
are identical to a different kind of brain state.
(iii) My c-fiber firings have a frequency but my pains do not. In reply to this objection the
identity theorist will simply assert that we have discovered (somewhat surprisingly)
that pains have a frequency. Remember that the identity theorist offers scientific
identities like 'lightning is an atmospheric electrical discharge' as examples of the kind
of identity she has in mind. Now if the identity between lightning and atmospheric
electrical discharge is correct, lightning has a voltage. I guess that to the modern mind
that may not sound too surprising, but two hundred years ago someone would have
been puzzled by that claim. Similarly, given the current state of understanding of
psychology and neuroscience, it will strike many people as a bit odd to say that pain
has a frequency. Nevertheless, science has discovered that it does.
There is one more application of Leibniz's principle which we should briefly
consider. There is something that it is like to be in pain-it hurts. On the other
hand, it is very hard to conceive how electrical activity in a nerve cell could hurt.
As Colin McGinn put it, how could technicolor consciousness arise from gray brain
matter (McGinn 1 99 1 : 1 )7 So, it seems that pains have a property-hurting
which no brain state could ever have. Consequently, pains cannot be identical to
c-fiber firing.
It must be admitted that consciousness raises very serious difficulties for the
identity theory. However, further discussion of consciousness will be deferred
until Part 4.
2. Type identity and token identity revisited. We saw in Section 3. 1 that the identity.
theory identifies mental state types with brain state types. The emphasis on type
identity has, however, been challenged. There is a general consensus amongst
contemporary philosophers of mind that the type identities proposed by the
ident i t y theory have to be either restricted or replaced with token identities. To get

----- page break -----

46 I P H I L O S O P H Y O F M I N D
a grip o n the concern about the type identities proposed by the identity theory, we
will consider a few examples.
Let's agree that for the sake of argument in humans pain is c-fiber firing. Now
we can easily imagine animals with nervous systems quite different from our own;
more specifically, we can imagine animals which don't have c-fibers. Let's agree,
again for the sake of argument, that squid have nervous systems quite different
from our own and lack c-fibers. (This isn't at all implausible. The squid brain is
very different from our own. From an evolutionary perspective, humans and
squid are only very distantly related. You have to go back a very long way to find
a creature which was an ancestor of both ourselves and the squid.)
So far we have assumed only that squid


don't have c-fibers. It seems quite likely,
though, that they experience pain (or at least we have no very good reasons to
doubt that they can be in pain). Consequently, the identity theory is in trouble: if
squid can lack c-fibers but feel pain, then it cannot be the case that pain is identical
to c-fiber firing. Another example will help reinforce the point.
Imagine a group of aliens whose brains (if you can call them that) are made up
of silicon chips. They certainly don't have anything even remotely like c-fibers.
Nevertheless, we can imagine that they feel pain when, for example, they stub
their toe on the way into the teletransporter, or get a sore throat from repeatedly
shouting, 'Exterminate all Earthlings'.
The examples we have just considered support the idea that pain is identical to
different physical states in different kinds of creatures. Pain is said to be multiply
realized: in different creatures pain is 'realized' in different ways. One way to
respond to the multiple realizability of pain is to restrict the type identities to species:
Pain-in-humans is type identical to c-fiber firings.
Pain-in-squid is type identical to d-fiber firings.
Pain-in-aliens is type identical to activity in silicon chip E.
This list of type identities could, in principle, be extended indefinitely. I will call the
resulting theory of mental states the restricted type identity theory to indicate that the
type identities proposed are restricted to a given species.
However, it's quite likely that there are relevant differences within a single species.
For example, I believe that the Eiffel Tower is in Paris. Chances are you do too. So
we both have a token of the type belief that the Elffel Tower is in Paris 'stored' in our
Ill'ads. However, it's likely that the exact way in which my token of that belief is
' i l l fl'd in my head differs slightly from the way in which your token of that belief
I, ' 1 1 l H'd i l l your head. Whilst there's good reason to think that the coarse anatomy
III yl l m hr.l i n is very similar to mine, and that the mechanisms whereby
1 1 I 1 1 lI'1 1 I 11 1 1 1 1 1 1 is stored in the brain are similar in both cases, it's unlikely t h a t
1 1 1 1 " " 1 1 11 1 1 1 1 1 1 .lhmll I hl' location of the Eifkl Tower is st ored i n pn'l'isl' l y 1 1l l' 'il l 1 1 l'

----- page break -----

T i l E I[) E N T IT Y T1 1 1'. ( ) I{ Y I 1\ 7
'place' in both brains. Exactly how a piece of information is stored seellls t o
depend on the other information your brain has already soaked up, and your bra i n
has no doubt soaked up different information from mine.
By way of analogy, think about the way information is stored on the hard drive
of a computer. The exact pattern of storage on a hard drive depends on the
information already stored on it. New information often ends up scattered around
on unused portions of the drive. Consequently, even if copies of the same
document are stored on computers of the same model, it's unlikely that the
document will be stored in exactly the same way in both machines.
So once again we have an example of multiple realization: the way your belief
about the Eiffel Tower is realized will probably differ slightly from the way my
belief is realized. However, unlike the pain case discussed earlier, these multiple
realizations occur within a single species. (I am assuming here that you're a
human being ! ) These considerations have led some philosophers of


 mind to
abandon even the restricted type identity theory. On their view, the most we can
say is that each mental state token is identical to some brain state token. In other
words, these philosophers endorse only the token identity of mental states with
brain states. I will sometimes refer to this view as the 'token identity theory'.
I will not try to settle the dispute between those who advocate the restricted type
identity theory and those who only advocate the token identity of mental states and
brain states. (If you want to explore that issue, see Further reading, below.) It's
enough for our purposes to note that the identity theory, as originally stated, is mis
taken: there are no simple type identities between mental states and brain states.
3.5
Reductive and non reductive physicalism
The term 'reduction' is used in a great many ways, and for some people is a term
of abuse. Even in the philosophy of mind the term is used in at least two ways.
1 . Intertheoretic reduction. Sometimes it is possible to show that one theory
( the 'reduced' theory) can be derived from another (the 'reducing' theory). In that
case an intertheoretic reduction has been achieved. Notice that the emphasis
here is on theories-'intertheoretic' means 'between theories'. The example
of intertheoretic reduction standardly given is the derivation of classical
thermodynamics from the kinetic theory of gases. The former theory describes the
behavior of gases in terms of their temperature, pressure, and volume; the latter
describes the behavior of gases in terms of the kinetic energy and impacts of gas
ll1olecu les. The derivation is achieved with the help of 'bridge laws' which identify
t he t e rms of one theory with those of another. For example, the pressure of a gas
is i d e ll l i fied with t h e mean (or 'average' ) kinetic energy of its gas molecules.

----- page break -----

48 I P H I L O S O PH Y O F MIND
2. Ontological reduction. Sometimes it's possible to show that what appear to be
two distinct kinds of phenomena are in fact the same kind of phenomena; that is,
sometimes we can establish type identities (see Section 3.2). In that case we can
say that one phenomenon has been ontologicaIIy reduced to another. The
classic example is water and H20. Water is type identical to H20, and the discovery
that water is H20 facilitated the (ontological) reduction of water to H20. (Why has
water been reduced to H20 rather than vice versa? The general idea is that
chemistry has the resources to deal with a much wider range of phenomena than
does a science that is restricted to studying water. Consequently, chemistry is held
to be the more 'basic' or 'fundamental' science.)
We have seen that Smart's version of the identity theory proposes type identities
between mental states and brain states. That is, it asserts a series of ontological
reductions between the kinds found in psychology and those found in brain
science: the former are to be (ontologically) reduced to the latter. Moreover, the
identity theorist asserts that, if we can locate the appropriate bridge laws,
psychology will be intertheoretica!ly reduced to neuroscience. Smart's kind of
physicalism is therefore often called reductive physicalism.
In contrast, the position which I have called the 'token identity theory' is a kind of
non reductive physicalism. It denies that there are type identities between mental
states and brain states, and so is opposed to


ontological reduction. Moreover, it
denies that there is any meaningful sense in which intertheoretic reduction could be
achieved. Since mental states are, according to the token identity theory, multiply
realized, there can be no simple bridge laws linking mental states with brain states.
You might like to keep the expressions 'reductive physicalism' and 'nonreduct
ive reductive physicalism' in mind as you read around the topic: you're very likely
to come across them.
3.6
Conclusion
The identity theory has a great many advantages but also some striking
disadvantages. Is it possible to avoid what is problematic about the identity theory
without losing what is valuable? In the next chapter we will examine
functionalism which neatly sidesteps the issues raised by multiple realization
whilst retaining many of the attractive features of the identity theory.
S U M MARY
( I ) ""mrding to the identity theory, mental states are brain states.
( 2 ) "n-ordlllK 1 0 Ihe identity theory, the identities hetween menial slales a n d
h ... l l l l Slilll's a n' analogous 1 0 scie n l i l k iuen l i l k's (e.g. wall'" = UlO ) .

----- page break -----

T H E I D E NTITY THE O R Y I 49
( 3 ) Types are kinds of things; tokens are individual members of types. Example:
Lassie is a token of the type dog.
(4) According to the identity theory, the identities between mental states and
brain states are type identities.
( 5 ) The identity theory accounts for a number of the features of mental states
discussed in the Introduction. In particular, it predicts the existence of
mind-brain correlations.
(6) The multiple realization of mental states creates a major difficulty for the
identity theory. The restricted identity theory and the token identity theory
were developed in response to multiple realization.
(7) The identity theory is a kind of reductive physicalism; the restricted identity
theory and the token identity theory are kinds of nonreductive physicalism.
FU RTH E R READIN G
The most important contemporary source for the identity theory is Smart's
'Sensations and Brain Processes' ( 1 959); see also Place 1 956. Good discussions of the
identity theory can be found in Armstrong 1 968: Ch. 6, Sections I-IV; Churchland
1 988: 26-35; Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 1 996: Ch. 6; and Kim 1 996: Ch. 3. The
papers in Part 2 of Block 1 980 are both relevant and of outstanding quality; they are,
however, all rather hard. For an excellent discussion of the issue of token identity
versus restricted type identity see Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 1 996: 96-1 0 1 .
For a good discussion of intertheoretic reduction see Churchland 1 986: Section 7.2.
For more on reductive and nonreductive physicalism see Kim 1 996: Ch. 9.
For a fascinating account of Phineas Gage's case see Damasio ( 1 994: Chs 1 and 2 ) .
T U TO R I A L Q U E ST I O N S
( 1 ) Explain the type/token distinction.
(2) Give examples of (i) token identities and (ii) type identities.
( 3 ) Does the identity theory assert type or token identities between mental
states and brain states?
(4) Which of the features of mental states given in the Introduction can the
identity theory easily account for? Which does it struggle to account for?
( 5 ) The Ph ineas Gage case is an example of a deficit study. Can you find another
e x a m pic or a defi cit st udy which reveals a mind-brain correlation?
(6) What docs it 1l11',1 1 1 to say that mental states a


re multiply realized?
( 7 ) How docs 1 1 I 1 I l t ipll- n"l l i l'
.? l I ioll cha l iengl' the identity theory?
(S) Ih'sniilc ( i ) i l l t l, rt hl'o l'l't!l' n'd u l'l lon lind (ii) ontologica l red uct i o n .

=== Ravenscroft — Functionalism ===

4
Functionalism
. . . one of the major theoretical developments of twentieth -century analytic
philosophy.
-Ned Block
Philosophy is a hard subject, and even amongst professional philosophers there
are major disagreements. The philosophy of mind is no exception, and as yet there
is no consensus about the nature of mental states. (This is not to say that there has
been no progress on the issue: we are now much clearer on which answers are the
wrong ones, and we have a keener sense of what problems need to be solved. )
Whilst there isn't complete agreement about the nature o f mental states, it's fair to
say that functionalism plays a central role in contemporary philosophy of mind.
Even those philosophers who reject functionalism agree that they need to explain
in detail what's wrong with it.
4.1
Introducing functionalism
In the previous chapter we noticed that mental states can be multiply realized. In
humans the state which realizes pain is (say) c-fiber firing; in squid it's (say)
d-fiber firing. Multiple realization raises a puzzle: what do old Eight-legs and
I have in common when we are both in pain? It can't be c-fiber firing because
Eight-legs has no c-fibers (or so I will assume ) . And it can't be d-fiber firing
because I have no d-fibers (or so I will assume) . In virtue of what, then, is it true
that Eight-legs and I are both in pain?
Functionalism provides an answer to this puzzle. According to functionalism,
(·-tiher firing does the same job in me as d-fiber firing does in Flipper. On this view,
I I I Ill' i n pain is to have an internal state which does a certain job. Which job is
l i toll? Vl' ry roughly, an internal state does the 'pain j ob' if it is caused by bodily
d.IIIl.I?ll' ,l l l d causes us to say 'ouch' and rub the sore spot. So, according to
l unctionalism, III he in pain is to have an internal state which is activated by hodily

----- page break -----

F U N C T I O N A L I S M I 5 1
damage and which causes us to say 'ouch' and rub the sore spot. More generally,
according to functionalism, to be in (or have) mental state M is to have an internal
state which does the 'M-job'.
Confused? Not to worry. Let's work through some analogies and a couple of
examples. After that. I'm pretty sure you'll get the idea.
First analogy. Practically all cars have carburetors. A carburetor is a device
which combines petrol with air and delivers the resulting mixture to the engine.
In my car the carburetor is mainly made out of brass. (I drive an old Ford.) In
more modern cars the carburetor is made out of a more sophisticated alloy. In the
future, car manufacturers may make carburetors out of high-tech plastic. It
doesn't matter what a carburetor is made out of as long as it can combine petrol
with air and deliver the resulting mixture to the engine. That is, something is a
carburetor because it does a certain job-mixing petrol with air and delivering the
resulting mixture to the engine-not because it is made out of some particular
material.
In summary, carburetors are multiply realized. What my carburetor has in
common with yours is that they both perform the same job: they both combine
petrol and air and deliver the resulting mixture to the engine. It is irrelevant that
my carburetor is brass and yours some high-tech plastic. All that matters is that
they get the job done.
Second analogy. An antibiotic is a substance which does a certain job: it kills
disease-causing


 bacteria without doing serious harm to the patient. Penicillin kills
disease-forming bacteria without doing undue harm to the patient; consequently
it's an antibiotic. Erythromycin also kills disease-causing bacteria without doing
serious harm to the patient; consequently it too is an antibiotic. However,
penicillin and erythromycin have quite different chemical structures.
In summary, antibiotics are multiply realized. What penicillin and erythromycin
have in common is that they both do the same job: they kill disease-causing
bacteria without doing serious harm to the patient. It is irrelevant to their being
antibiotics that penicillin and erythromycin have different chemical structures. All
that matters is that they get the job done.
According to functionalism, mental states are in important ways like carburetors
and antibiotics. What makes a carburetor a carburetor is that it does the 'carburetor
job'; what makes an antibiotic an antibiotic is that it does the 'antibiotic job'.
Similarly, what makes a mental state the particular state it is, is that it does the job
associated with that mental state. Here are a few examples.
First example. Let's return to the case of pain. The doctrine of multiple realization
/ays I h a l pain can he realized in a variety of different ways. Functionalism explains
lhe Ill ll lti ple realization of pa i n as follows. According to functionalism an organism

----- page break -----

52 I P H I L O S O P H Y O F M I N D
Stepping o n
a tack,
breaking a
leg , etc.
Anxiety
Pai n
Saying
1---+ 'ouch',
screaming,
etc.
Figure 4.1 A highly simplified account of the pain role. The arrows represent the causal relation ,
with the arrowhead located at the effect
is in pain if it has a state inside it which does the pain job-or, as philosophers of
mind prefer to say, if it has a state inside it which occupies the pain role. I'll say more
about the pain role shortly-for the moment just think of it as the job pain does.
Now in principle lots of different sorts of things could occupy the pain role, just as
lots of different sorts of things can occupy the carburetor role or the antibiotic role.
Consequently, pain is mUltiply realizable.
So what is the pain role? The pain role is defined in terms of inputs, outputs, and
internal connections. The inputs are the circumstances which cause pain; they
include stepping on a tack, breaking a leg, and burning your hand. The outputs are
the behaviors which pain causes, including saying 'ouch', screaming, and rubbing
the sore spot. The internal connections are the causal links between pain and
other mental states. They include, for example, the causal link between pain and
anxiety: pains (especially severe ones) often cause anxiety. (Figure 4. 1 summar
izes the pain role. ) Putting all of this together, we can say that pain is a state which
is caused by stepping on a tack (etc.), often makes us anxious, and causes us to say
'ouch' ( etc. ) .
Second example. Consider m y belief that a lion is near. (Let's assume that it's a
wild lion. ) On the input side my belief is caused by hearing a lion, or seeing a lion,
or being told by a reliable witness that a lion is near. My belief has internal
connections to, for example, fear: believing a lion is near very often causes fear.
Things get more complex when we consider the output side. Typically, when we
believe that there is a lion near we run away. That's because the belief that



lism, pain is identical to the occupant of the pain role. Let's call the occupant
of the pain role 'R'. Thus we arrive at our first premise:
1 . Pain = R .
Now let's assume for the moment that R-the occupant of the pain role-is
identical to c-fiber firing. Thus we have our second premise:
2. R = c-fiber firing .
By the principle of the transitivity of identity we can now obtain:
3 . Pain = c-fiber firing .
In other words, if we assume that the occupant of the pain role is c-fiber firing,
we can derive the type identity theory of mental states from functionalism.
However, as we saw in Chapter 3, pain is very likely to be multiply realized; for
example it may be the case that whilst in humans pain is identical to c-fiber firing,
in squid it is identical to d-fiber firing. Consequently, the assumption that R is
identical to c-fiber firing is very probably mistaken. Far more plausible is the claim
that in humans R is identical to c-fiber firing. Reconstructing our argument we get:
1 . Pain = R.
2'. In humans, R = c-fiber firing.
Therefore,
3 ' . In humans, pain = c-fiber firing .
The conclusion expresses what in Chapter 3 we called the 'restricted identity
theory'.
Finally, it may turn out that even the restricted identity theory is false. Perhaps
the most that we can say is that in Bloggs R is identical to some brain state B. In
that case we can derive the token identity theory from functionalism:
I. Pain = R.
2". In Bloggs, R = B.
rherefore,
I". III Bloggs, pain = B.
WI' l I ,wI' Sl'l'n that from functionalism we can derive three versions of the idell
t i t y 1 1 1t'000y: t i ll' t ype identity theory, the restricted t ype iden t i t y t ill' ory, a n d I h l'
token identity 1 l l l'my. Th e I h rl'l' dcriva l io m d i ffl' r i ll I h ,l t c,l l'll rc l i l's O i l ,1 d i fkrclll

----- page break -----

F U N C T I O N A L I S M I 5 5
second premise. In each case the second premise i s an empirical claim-a claim
that can only be established by observation and experiment. In the case of pain it's
plausible that neuroscience will establish that the same type of brain state plays
the pain role in all humans. However, it is likely that some mental states (for
example, the belief that the Eiffel Tower is in Paris) are realized by subtly different
brain states in different people.
4.3
Functionalism and the six features of mental states
In the previous section we saw that functionalism easily yields various versions
of the identity theory. Consequently, functionalism's capacity to explain the six
features of mental states identified in the Introduction closely parallels that of the
identity theory.
I . Some mental states are caused by states of the world. We have seen that it is very
likely that the states which occupy the functional roles characteristic of the
various mental states are states of the brain. Consequently, for the functionalist
the claim that some mental states are caused by states of the world is true only
if some brain states are caused by states of the world. And, as we saw in Section
3.2, some brain states are indeed caused by states of the world.
2. Some mental states cause actions. Again recall that it is very likely that the states
which occupy the functional roles characteristic of mental states are states of
the brain. Consequently, for the functionalist the claim that some mental states
cause actions is true only if some brain states cause actions. A


nd, again as we
saw in Section 3 .2, some brain states do indeed cause actions.
3. Some mental states cause other mental states. If mental states are brain states, then
the claim that some mental states cause other mental states amounts to the
claim that some brain states cause other brain states. And that is certainly true.
However, as we have noted in previous chapters, it's not merely the case that
some mental states cause other mental states; in addition the causal relations
between mental states sometimes mirror the rational relations between them.
I'm getting a bit tired of the old examples, so here's a new one.
Say that Bloggs has a terrible hangover and that, whilst he can remember it's the
weekend, he doesn't know which day of the weekend it is:
I . B I ( )gg2 bel ieves that either it's Saturday or it's S u n da y.
Hc t hell I lot in's t h a t he can't hear church bells, and realizes that it's not Sunday:
2. I I l ogg\ I wl il'VI'\ I l 1.tl I I 's 1 101 Sunday.

----- page break -----

56 I P H I L O S O PH Y O F M I N D
Together, these two beliefs cause Bloggs to have a third belief:
3. Bloggs believes that it's Saturday.
Notice that in addition to the causal relation between Bloggs's beliefs, there is
also a rational relation between them. (Strictly speaking there is a rational relation
between the contents of Bloggs's beliefs.) The following is a valid argument:
I. Either it's Saturday or it's Sunday.
2 ' . It's not Sunday.
Therefore,
3 ' . It's Saturday.
So far we've j ust seen an example of the way in which the causal processes
between mental states sometimes mirror the rational relations between them. Can
functionalism explain that feature of mental states? The only detailed theory of
this phenomenon we presently have-the computational theory-is in some
important respects similar to functionalism. However, the computational theory
insists that mental states are something more than the occupants of characteristic
functional roles. In particular, it insists that they have a particular kind of structure.
(We will develop this idea in Chapter 6.) If the computational theory is right,
functionalism cannot be the whole story about mental states.
4. Some mental states are conscious. As usual, consciousness is a major headache. It
seems that we can imagine a robot whose central computer has states which
occupy the functional role characteristic of pain but which does not feel pain. If
that's right, consciousness presents functionalism with a very serious problem.
5. Some mental states are about things in the world. In Chapter 9 we will see that there
are, broadly speaking, two theoretical approaches to this issue. One of them
functional role semantics-sits very comfortably with functionalism. However
the other approach, which includes the causal theory of content, requires at the
very least additions to the basic functionalist framework.
6. Some kinds of mental states are systematically correlated with certain kinds of brain
states. As we have noted, it's overwhelmingly plausible that the functional roles
characteristic of the various mental states are occupied by brain states.
Consequently, functionalism is compatible with the claim that there are
systematic correlations between mental states and certain brain states.
OVI'rail, the result is a mixed bag. Functionalism straightforwardly explains
'0111" 01' t ht, six features; may succeed at explaining others; and st ruggles


with the
1'1'11111 1 1111,'r.
W,' t l l l'l1 1 10W to a pair of wel l - k nown antifu llClionalisl a rgu lIll'lIts.

----- page break -----

F U N C T I O NALI S M I 57
4.4
Two famous arguments against functionalism
According to functionalism, mental states are the occupants of characteristic
causal roles. This suggests two strategies for devising objections to functionalism.
Consider some mental state M. If functionalism is true, any organism which is
in M has a state which occupies the M-role, and any organism which has a state
which occupies the M-role is in M. So, if we could find an organism that is in M
but does not have a state which occupies the M-role, we would have shown func
tionalism to be false. Alternatively, if we could find an organism that has a state
which occupies the M-role but which is not in M, we would have shown func
tionalism to be false.
The antifunctionalist arguments we will consider here all take the latter form:
they all purport to describe a situation which, intuitively, involves no mental states
but which is such that the relevant functional roles are occupied.
1 . The China Brain. As we have seen, functionalists accept that, at least in
principle, mental states could be realized by a wide range of physical-or even
nonphysical-states. In the human case, mental states are most plausibly realized
by brain states. We can, however, imagine them being realized by something quite
different. For example, imagine that the entire population of China is enlisted to
realize the mental states of a typical person-say Bloggs. The realization is
achieved as follows. Each person in China is given a mobile phone and a set of
instructions. The instructions tell them which numbers to ring when they have
been rung by certain numbers.
For example, Jiang's instructions might be:
? If rung by 724 1 144 then ring 722 9768 and 667 1 849.
? If rung by 532 8 1 8 1 and 9 5 5949 then ring 29 1 4245.
What Jiang i s i n fact doing i s simulating the function o f one o f Bloggs's neurons
and this goes for every other person in China as well. Taken together, the population
of China is simulating, neuron by neuron, Bloggs's brain. Consequently, whatever
functional roles are occupied in Bloggs's brain are also occupied by the popUlation of
China. For example, if Bloggs believes that it is raining, the population of China
believes that too. But that's absurd: a bunch of people ringing each other on mobile
phones doesn't believe anything.
It's important to stress that when I say that according to functionalism the
pop u l a t ion of China believes that it is raining, I'm not referring to the beliefs of
i n d i v i d u a l ci t izens. Rat h er, I'm referring to the entire population taken as a single
u ll i ! . The poi n t ('a n lw p u t this way. Say that there are a billion people in China,
a l ! of wholl1 t ,l k l' I'Mt i n t ill' C h i na Arain experiment. In that case, according to

----- page break -----

')8 I PHILOSOPHY OF M I N D
functionalism there will be a billion and one minds in China . There will be a
billion minds each of which belongs to exactly one Chinese citizen, and there will
be, in addition, the mind realized by the entire population during the phone
link-up.
There would, of course, be very many practical difficulties in actually setting up
the China Brain experiment. For one thing, there are far more neurons in the
human brain than there are people in Chi


na. In addition, we don't know
anywhere near enough about the human brain to write out the instruction sheets
for the participants. Nevertheless, functionalism is committed to the view that
if such an experiment were undertaken, the population of China really would
realize a mind.
The China Brain is supposed to be a case in which all the relevant functional
roles are occupied but the corresponding mental states don't exist. For some
people, the intuition that the China Brain has no mental states is very strong. But
should we accept that intuition? Two factors would appear to drive the intuition.
In my view, careful consideration of those factors reveals that the intuition based
on those factors isn't worth much.
First factor: consciousness. My guess is that many people will doubt whether what
it's like for the China Brain to believe that it's raining is the same as what it's like
for Bloggs to so believe. Indeed, I suspect that most people will think that there is
nothing that it is like for the China Brain to believe this or fear that. But we have
already admitted that consciousness is a big problem for functionalism; the
question is whether the China Brain presents a further problem to functionalism.
We can put the issue this way: would the China Brain have a mind identical in all
nonconscious aspects to Bloggs's mind? Will it process the same stimuli in the same
way to yield the same output? Will its thoughts follow the same patterns? I suspect
that for most people the answer will be 'yes'. In other words, what was driving
their initial claim that the China Brain would not have a mind was a worry
about consciousness, and we have already acknowledged that functionalism has a
problem with consciousness.
Second factor: chauvinism. Chauvinism is a bias in favor of the familiar. Racism is a
kind of chauvinism because it's a bias in favor of the race most familiar to the
racist-his or her own. Now the mind realized by the China Brain would be a very
different sort of mind to those with which we are presently most familiar. The
m i nds with which we are presently most familiar are human minds, and human
I l l i nds are found inside skulls and are realized by billions of brain cells which
I o l l l l l i l i n icate with each other using special chemicals called 'neurotransmitters'.
1 1 1 l'l I l I l r.ls l , the China Brain is not found in any single skull. It is distributed
1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1-1 1 1 0 1 1 1 .1 billion skulls which are widely located over <l V<lst co u n t ry.
MOI I'OYI'r, 1 1 11' C h i n a B r<l i n 's ' n e u rons' ( i .e. the i nd i vid u .l l Chil1ese dti/.l'I1S)

----- page break -----

F U N C T I O N A L I S M I 59
communicate with each other by mobile phones rather than by neurotransmitters.
Consequently, there is a risk of chauvinism here-a risk of a bias in favor of minds
realized in the way ours are realized.
Chauvinism about minds is nothing new. Europeans used to think that
non-Eu ropeans didn't have sophisticated minds. Such attitudes are now quite
properly denounced as chauvinist. Similarly, some people have expressed
chauvinism about animal minds, declaring that chimpanzees, for example, don't
'really' feel pain. But how do these cases differ from the China Brain? Isn't our
rejection of the China Brain as mindless merely a chauvinistic refusal to accept
that there might be minds realized in different ways to our own minds? Without
an argument to show that the d



extra cholesterol) for breakfast, they're not
likely to have a carrot sandwich (hold the butter) for lunch. Consequently, if the
robot is to behave like a typical person, the list of circumstances and responses must
exhibit an appropriate level of consistency.
The robot we have been discussing was first described by Ned Block ( 1 98 1 ), and
has since been called 'Blockhead' in his honor. In fact, Block's robot is a little
different from the one just described as Block arranges the table of circumstances
and responses into a branching structure called a 'look-up tree'. This technicality
need not detain us; the robot as I have described it is enough to make Block's
point. Let us turn now to the antifunctionalist argument Block makes with his
Blockhead example.
Most people have the strong intuition that Blockhead has no mental states. That
intuition is supported by the observation that Blockhead just blindly follows the
instructions provided by the scientist. There is nothing going on inside Blockhead
I hal looks remotely like deliberation. Blockhead no more has mental states than
dOl'S a door bell which rings when you press a button. (Block himself remarked
I h.1 I Bl orklwad is no more intelligent than a toaster. ) Block argues, however that
I'l I l l l'l iOllalism is committed to the claim that Blockhead has menta l Sla t es. If
I l lork " rl"h L h I lH·' iOlla !ism is i n big trouble.

----- page break -----

F U N C T I O N A L I S M I 6 1
Why might Block think that, according t o functionalism, Blockhead has mental
states? Consider what happens when Blockhead finds itself in a burning building.
Seeing the flames causes Blockhead to search the list of circumstances for the entry,
'In a burning building'. Corresponding to that entry is the response, 'Find the fire
escape', so Blockhead hurries around looking for the fire escape. Now, putting it
crudely, functionalism says that Blockhead believes that it is in a burning building
if it has an internal state caused by seeing flames and causing fire-escape-seeking
behavior. And Blockhead does have such a state. As we have seen, the entry in
the table of circumstances, 'In a burning building' is activated by seeing flames
and causes fire-escape-seeking behavior. So, according to functionalism, Blockhead
believes that it is in a burning building. But we have already seen that Blockhead
has no mental states. So functionalism is false.
The trouble with Block's argument is that it misrepresents functionalism. When
I sketched Block's argument I said that putting it crudely functionalism says that
Blockhead believes that it is in a burning building if it has an internal state caused
by seeing flames and causing fire-escape-seeking behavior. But that is to
describe functionalism far too crudely. It's more accurate to say that, according to
functionalism, the belief that the building is burning is a state which occupies a
certain functional role. That role has inputs which include, but are not exhausted
by, seeing flames; has outputs which include, but are not exhausted by, looking for
the fire escape; and has internal connections to other mental states (for example
to the belief that the situation is life threatening) . Moreover, the outputs of the
belief that the building is burning in part depend on the presence of other beliefs
and desires. For example, the belief that the building is burning will only lead to
fire-escape-seeking behavior in co



vity Argument' was independently articulated by
David Armstrong ( 1 968) and David Lewis ( 1 966, 1 972, 1 994) . A more accessible
discussion of the relationship between functionalism and the identity theory can
be found in Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 1 996: Ch. 6.
Ned Block described both the China Brain and the Blockhead example in his
important paper 'Troubles with Functionalism' (Block 1 978) . In that paper he
also made significant distinctions between different types of functionalism, and
discussed concerns about functionalism and consciousness.
TUTO R I A L Q U E ST I O N S
( I ) Describe functionalism.
( 2 ) In your view, which of the six features of mental states can functionalism
handle?
( 3 ) Sketch the Transitivity Argument, and show how functionalism is compatible
with (i) the identity theory; (ii) the restricted identity theory; and (iii) the
token identity theory.
(4) Describe the China Brain. Does it present a serious challenge to functionalism?
( 5) Describe the Blockhead. Does it present a serious challenge to functionalism?

=== Ravenscroft — Dualism ===

1
Dualism
You gotta have soul.
-Billy Joel
According to an ancient tradition, the mind is a nonphysical object. This doctrine is
called substance dualism, and is the focus of the first half of this chapter (Sections
1 . 1 and 1 .2). According to substance dualism, the mind is an entirely different sort
of thing to the body. The body is a physical object-it's located in space; it's made
from the atoms familiar to chemistry; it has a cert'tin weight and height; and it can
be seen and touched. The mind, on the other hand, is a nonphysical object. It's not
located in space; it's not made from the atoms familiar to chemistry; it has neither
weight nor height; and it can't be seen or touched. (In Chapter 8 we will refine our
understanding of the difference between the physical and the nonphysical. For the
moment we'll proceed on an intuitive understanding of the distinction.)
We've seen that. according to substance dualism, mind and body are different
sorts of things or substances. (If it helps, read 'substance' as 'stuff'.) We can now
see where the label 'substance dualism' comes from. According to substance
dualism there are two distinct kinds of substances in the world: mental substances
and physical substances. In other words, there is a duality of substances. Later in
this chapter we will consider another form of dualism-property dualism.
Whereas substance dualism claims that there are two fundamentally different kinds
of substances in the world, property dualism claims that there are two fundamentally
different kinds of properties in the world. (When philosophers use the word prop
erty they mean, roughly, 'feature'. ) I'll say more about the distinction between
properties and substances in Section 1.4.
Before getting started one brief terminological point is in order. Sometimes
substance dualists call the nonphysical mind they postulate the 'soul'. However,
when discussing substance dualism I'll tend to avoid the term 'soul' because of its
associations with religious doctrines that are not part of substance dualism. For
example, according to common usage the soul is an entity which survives the
death of the body. However, the philosophical doctrine of substance dualism takes
110 stand on the afterlife one way or the other.

----- page break -----

10 I PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
1.1
Substance dualism
Imagine that, whilst on safari, Bloggs sees a lion a short distance away and runs
back to his car. A few quick strides and he's safe inside. Here's how the substance
dualist accounts for this series of events. First. light waves from the lion hit Bloggs's
retina, stimulating it in a particular way. Bloggs's brain then extracts sensory
information from the activation pattern on his retina, and passes that information
on to his nonphysical mind. His mind interprets the sensory information it has
received from the brain and recognizes that there is a lion present. It then decides
that the best thing to do is to run quickly back to the vehicle. A message (RUN!) is
sent from Bloggs's mind back to his brain. His brain sends the relevant signals to
his leg muscles and he runs quickly back to the car.
According to substance dualism, mind and body, whilst quite distinct, interact
with one another. Sensory information about the state of the world is sent from
brain to mind, and decisions about how to react are sent from mind to brain. Your
body is like a probe, sent by NASA to explore a distant planet. The pr


obe sends
pictures back to mission control, where scientists decide what the probe should do
next. Instructions are then sent back to the probe which responds accordingly.
The probe itself is entirely unintelligent . Similarly, information about the world is
communicated by the body to the mind; the mind decides on a course of action and
communicates the decision back to the body. The body itself makes no decisions.
It's important to note that the relations between the mind and the body are
causal relations. The sensory information sent by the brain to the mind causes
the mind to register the presence of the lion. And the mind's decision to run causes
the brain to activate the relevant muscles. In other words, there are two -way
causal interactions between the mind and the brain.
It's worth briefly considering two more examples .
1 . Say that Bloggs burns his hand on the stove and, accordingly, feels a painful
sensation. According to substance dualism, the damage to Bloggs's hand causes
a message to be sent to his brain, which in turn sends a message to his non
physical mind. The mind is then brought into a state which Bloggs recognizes
as a painful sensation. According to substance dualism, experiences of pain are
states of the nonphysical mind; the brain itself has no conscious experiences.
2. Say that Bloggs knows the following two things . (I) If it's Friday then it's
Jhlyday. (2) It's Friday. From (I) and (2) he works out something else:
( \) I1's pnyday. According to substance dualism, all of these knowledge states
111"1' slnll's of Bloggs's nonphysical mind. Moreover, his nonphysical mind's
111'111)1111 SI.lll's (1) and (2) caused it to be in state (3). On this view, all rational
1111'1'1\'111"1' tI!"l"ms in I he nonphysical mind; the brain isjust pla in dumb.

----- page break -----

1.2
Arguments in favor of substance dualism
DUALISM I II
In this section we will consider four arguments in favor of substance dualism. The
first three arguments all have the following structure:
1. Minds can __ .
2. No physical object can __ .
Therefore,
3. Minds are not physical objects.
Different arguments are obtained by filling in the empty slots in different ways.
1. Could a physical object use language? We obtain the first argument for substance
dualism by filling in the empty slots with 'use language':
la. Minds can use language.
2a. No physical object can use language.
Therefore,
3. Minds are not physical objects.
This argument was articulated by the seventeenth-century French philosopher,
scientist, and mathematician, Rene Descartes (1596- 1 650) . It seemed to him
impossible that a physical object could generate and understand the rich variety of
sentences which humans so effortlessly handle. Consequently, it seemed imposs
ible to Descartes that the human mind could be a physical object.
Since Descartes' day, a great deal has been learned about language. In particu
lar, we have come to appreciate that languages are regulated by a series of rules
that specify which sequences of words count as. grammatical sentences. These
rules are called the syntax of the language. The syntax of English, for example,
specifies that 'The boy ate the ice cream' is a grammatical sentence whereas' Ate
boy ice cream the the' is not. Syntax is mechanical in the sense that, in principle, a
computer could be programmed to determine of any sequence of English words
whether or not it's grammatical. I say 'in pri


nciple' because our understanding of
syntax remains incomplete. Nevertheless, we have good reason to accept that a
certain kind of physical object-a suitably programmed computer-could process
the rules of language. Consequently, it seems that Descartes was wrong to at least
this extent: a physical object could handle the syntax of language.
However, there is more to language than syntax. In particular, words and sen
tences have meaning. The ways in which meanings are assigned to the words and
sentences of a language is called the semantics of that language. Recently, lin
guists and philosophl'rs have began to unravel the mysteries of semantics. It's fair

----- page break -----

12 I PHILOSOPHY OF M IND
to say that, at present, we don't have a fully worked out theory of semantics. But
it's also fair to say that, at present, there seems to be little reason to doubt that a
physical object could use language meaningfully. Descartes' argument from the
claim that minds use language to the claim that the mind is a nonphysical object
therefore seems mistaken.
2. Could a physical object reason? The second argument for substance dualism we will
consider is very much like the first. Descartes not only doubted that a physical
object could use language; he also doubted whether such an object could reason:
1 b. Minds can engage in reasoning.
2b. No physical object can engage in reasoning.
There/ore,
3. Minds are not physical objects.
Descartes begins his defense of the crucial second premise by noting that
reasoning is universal in this sense: there are many circumstances about which
we can reason. He admits that there could be a mechanism for responding to any
one circumstance (e.g. responding to dogs); however, he claims that there could
not be a mechanism which responded to a multiplicity of circumstances (say, dogs,
breakfast, and algebra). Consequently, a machine which could respond univer
sally would require a vast number of mechanisms-one for each circumstance.
But, he says, that's impossible: the number of mechanisms involved would be too
great.
I'm unconvinced by Descartes' argument for the second premise. However,
rather than directly discussing the second premise, I propose to briefly consider
one kind of reasoning which modern machines can, at least to some extent,
achieve-mathematical reasoning. (As a significant mathematician, Descartes
would have been intrigued by the mechanization of mathematical reasoning. )
Just what d o w e mean b y the expression 'mathematical reasoning'? I f by 'math
ematical reasoning' we mean something like 'the ability to correctly apply
mathematical rules' then it's clear that physical objects can do mathematical
reasoning. After all, the cheapest pocket calculator can apply the rules of addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and so forth to a range of numbers.
'Mathematical reasoning' might, though, mean something else. It might refer to
the ability to discover new mathematical truths and methods. Newton and
\.('Ihniz, for example, invented calculus-an entirely new way of solving certain
lI1i1tht'matical problems. Could a computer be programmed to do mathematical
rt'nNonll1M In this sense? Could a computer discover calculus? This is a hard ques-
111111, lind IIIH' which we cannot address very fully here. What can be said is that
,'(rtl/h, kl"II.? or mathematical discoveries can now be made by computers. These

----- page break -----

DUALIS M I 13
disco


veries involve deriving new mathematical truths ('theorems') from
established mathematical claims ('axioms'). There are limits to how effective com
puters can be at making these sorts of discoveries. Nevertheless, it seems that at
least some sorts of mathematical reasoning can be achieved by physical objects,
and it is likely that future research will expand the range of mathematical prob
lems which computers can solve.
3. Could a physical object be conscious? The third argument for substance dualism is as
follows:
I c. Minds can be conscious.
2c. No physical object can be conscious.
There/ore,
3. Minds are not physical objects.
I suspect that considerations of consciousness weigh heavily with many dualists.
Sometimes these considerations amount to little more than the bald intuition that
no physical object could be conscious; sometimes they consist of sophisticated
arguments. For the moment I propose to simply set aside the issue of conscious
ness. That issue is so important-and so difficult-that Part 4 of this book is
devoted to discussing it. We will consider there whether the existence of con
sciousness provides good reason to endorse some form of dualism.
Before moving on to the final argument in favor of substance dualism, it is
worth mentioning that each of the three arguments just discussed relies on
Leibniz's principle of the indiscernibility of identicals. The German philosopher and
mathematician Gottfried Leibniz (1 646-1 716) pointed out that if X and Y are
identical then they have exactly the same properties. So, if there are properties of
the mind which no physical object could have then, by the principle of the indis
cernibility of identicals, the mind cannot be a physical object. And this is exactly
the strategy adopted by the three arguments we have been considering.
4. Doubt and existence. The last argument for substance dualism which we will con
sider is also due to Descartes. In the Meditations, Descartes noticed that he could
doubt the existence of his body. He begins by observing that sometimes when we
dream we mistake our dreams for reality. For example, I might dream that I'm
falling off a cliff, and whilst dreaming it seems to me entirely real that I'm falling off
a cliff. Nevertheless, I'm actually asleep in bed. It follows that at least many of my
present beliefs might be false. For example, it seems to me that at this moment I'm
wide awake, sitting in front of my laptop. But it must be admitted that I could be
asleep, dreaming that I'm sitting in front of my laptop. Consequently, my present
hl'lil'!' that I'm sitting in front of my laptop can be called into doubt. Similarly, my

----- page break -----

14 I PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
present belief that I have a body can be called into doubt. Perhaps I have no body
but am presently dreaming that I do.
Descartes strengthened this line of thought by introducing a new thought
experiment. It seems that I must admit that there might be an incredibly power
ful alien determined to mislead me in all possible ways. This creature controls
my thoughts, making me believe all sorts of things which are not true. But once
I admit that such a creature is possible, it seems that I must admit that my pre
sent belief that I have a body could be mistaken. Perhaps I am a disembodied
spirit who has been deceived by the powerful alien into believing that I have a
body.
Considerations like these led Descartes to the first premise of his argum


ent:
(A) I can doubt that I have a body.
Next, Descartes took his thought experiments a little further. We have admitted
that I might be dreaming that I'm sitting in front of my laptop. However, even if
I'm dreaming, one thing remains certain: that I exist. My belief that I exist must be
true, because even if I'm dreaming, I must exist in order to dream. Similarly, the
alien might deceive me in all sorts of ways. Nevertheless, it remains certain that I
exist. My belief that I exist must be true because, even if the alien is controlling my
thoughts, I must exist in order to be controlled.
Considerations like these led Descartes to his second premise:
(8) I cannot doubt that I exist.
From (A) and (B) it seems to follow that:
(C) I am not my body.
We will return to the inference from (A) and (B) to ( C ) shortly. For the moment,
notice that if we accept that I am my mind, then (C) entails the claim that:
(D) My mind is not my body.
Now (D) is not quite the same as substance dualism; nevertheless, establishing
(D) would go a long way towards establishing substance dualism.
Let's now think about the inference from (A) and (B) to ( C ) . At first glance, the
inference from (A) and (B) to ( C ) would appear to have the same structure as this
.1I'gument:
(A I) My ('ar is red.
(III) 1'h,' 4'olI' In front of me is not red.
'I'i/(/(/j,/'I',
((: I) Th,' nil III l!'Imt 01 Int' is not milll'.

----- page break -----

DUALISM I 1 5
The argument from (A 1 ) and (B I) to (C 1 ) is a good one. By the principle of the
indiscernibility of identicals, if the car in front of me is my car it must have exactly
the same properties as my car. Consequently, if my car is a different color to the
one in front of me, then the car in front of me is not mine.
Now the argument from ( A) and (B) to (C) also seems to rely on the principle of
the indiscernibilty of identicals. For it points out that I have one property-the
property of it not being doubted that I exist-and my body has another property
the property of it being doubted that it exists. Since I and my body have different
properties, it seems to follow that I am not my body.
But there's a catch. Consider the following argument.
(A2) I think my car is red.
(E2) I think the car in front of me is not red.
Therefore,
(C2) The car in front of me is not mine.
At first glance, this argument appears to rely on the principle of the indiscern
ibility of identicals. For it says that whilst my car has the property of being thought
to be red, the car in front of me does not, and so the car in front of me is not mine.
But it's clear that this argument does not work. Say that I have j ust won a blue car
in a lottery, but mistakenly believe that I have won a red car. I go to pick up my
new car and the lottery organizers show me a blue car. It really is my car, but
I don't think that it is because I expect a red car. In that case premises (A2 ) and (B2)
are both true: I think my car is red and I think the car in front of me is not red.
Nevertheless, the conclusion (C2) is false: the car in front of me is mine.
More generally, the principle of the indiscernibility of identicals does not work
when the properties in question involve psychological states like believing and
thinking. Now this is crucial for the evaluation of Descartes' argument. For
premises (A) and (B) both involve properties which involve the psychological
state of doubting. Another example will make it


quite clear that Descartes'
argument doesn't work:
(A3) I can doubt I am the author of this book.
(E 3) I cannot doubt that I exist.
Therefore,
(C3) I am not the author of this book.
Descartes has shown how I can doubt that I am the author of this book: I might have
merely dreamed that I wrote it or my thoughts might be under the control of a power
I'ul alien. And he has shown us how I cannot doubt that I exist. But it certainly does
1101 I'ollow Ihill I Jill nol the author of this book. Similarly, whilst I can doubt that
I h,lVl'.1 body ilnd nol douhl Ih<ll I exist, it does not follow that I am not my body.

----- page break -----

16 I PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
1.3
Arguments against substance dualism
In the previous section we considered four arguments in favor of substance
dualism. None of these arguments was very convincing. In this section I will
present three arguments against substance dualism.
1. Princess Elizabeth's argument. The substance dualist makes two claims about the
mind. (1) Mind and body are radically different kinds of substances. (2) Mind and
body causally interact. These two claims are in tension. If mind and body are sup
posed to be radically different, how can they causally interact? This objection was
first put to Descartes by his contemporary, Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia
(1618-80) . Descartes' replies were highly evasive!
Princess Elizabeth's argument has a certain amount of force. Nevertheless, the
argument can be overplayed. Notice that there are causal interactions between
very different kinds of physical substances. For example, sunshine can heat metaL
and yet sunshine and metal are quite different kinds of substance. The former is a
kind of electromagnetic radiation; the latter an assembly of atoms. If quite differ
ent kinds of physical substances can interact, why can't physical and nonphysical
substances interact? The crucial point, it seems to me, is not that mind and brain
are (according to substance dualism) radically different kinds of stuff; rather, the
crucial point is that the substance dualist has said absolutely nothing about the
details of the interaction. Physics can tell us in considerable detail about the ways
light affects matter, but the su\}stance dualist can provide no details at all about the
way the soul and brain affect each other.
2 . The explanatory completeness of physiology. If you ask a physiologist to describe
what happens when Bloggs runs away from a lion, they will say something like
this. Running occurs when certain muscle groups-especially the muscles in the
thigh-contract powerfully. The thigh muscles contract because they are stimu
lated by certain nerves. Those nerves arise in the spine, and are in turn stimulated
by special spinal nerves. The spinal nerves in their turn are stimulated by the
motor cortex-the part of the brain devoted to the initiation and control of move
ment. At this point the physiologist's account gets very complicated, but this much
is clear. The motor cortex is stimulated by those parts of the brain responsible for
decision making, which in turn receive input from the visual cortex-the part of
the brain responsible for vision. (Remember that Bloggs ran away because he saw
till' I ion.) And the activity in the visual cortex came about because Bloggs's retina
W.IS stimulated by the lion.
III.lVl', of wurse, left out a great deal of detail. The sum total of what physiology
hIlS ,IISl'OVt'rl'd about the cau


sal background of even a simple movement would fill
I' dot.l'lI hooks. Nl'vcrtheless, it's clear that the theory offered by t h e physiologist is

----- page break -----

D U A LIS M I 17
a physical one. There has been no mention whatsoever of nonphysical substances.
But if we can account for people's actions without appealing to nonphysical
substances, then substance dualism is mistaken to at least this extent: the non
physical mind does not cause people to behave as they do. Of course, the substance
dualist could concede this point but still insist that the nonphysical mind is respon
sible for other aspects of our mental life. For example, it might be argued
that, whilst not causally responsible for our actions, the nonphysical mind is
nevertheless the seat of consciousness. We return to the issue of consciousness in
Part 4. For the moment we can say this much: there is no need to believe in a
nonphysical mind in order to explain action.
3. The explanatory weakness of substance dualism. In the Introduction we noted six
general features of mental life which a good theory of mental states should be able
to explain (or explain away) :
I. Some mental states are caused by states o f the world.
2. Some mental states cause actions.
3. Some mental states cause other mental states.
4. Some mental states are conscious.
5. Some mental states are about things in the world.
6. Some kinds of mental states are systematically correlated with certain kinds of
brain states.
What is striking about substance dualism is the extent to which it fails to illumin
ate the items on this list. We have already seen that substance dualism has trouble
explaining the first two items on the list. Moreover, it is completely silent about
the third item: it says nothing at all about how one mental state causes another.
How do states of nonphysical stuff bring about other states of nonphysical stuff? In
particular, how is it that some of the causal relations between nonphysical states
respect the canons of rationality? No answers are forthcoming.
Turning to the fourth item we can observe that substance dualists do not offer a
theory of consciousness. They assert that nonphysical mental stuff is conscious;
they do not tell us what it is about nonphysical stuff that facilitates consdollsness,
This problem is especially telling if we allow that some mental stall'S iHl' uncon
scious. What is the difference between conscious, nonphysil:al IIll'lllal slates and
unconscious, nonphysical mental stales?
Item ( 5 ) on the list of gennal i't'atllfes of 1lll'llt.ll Sl.ll,'s Ilol,'s Ihat at least some
mental states are about thillgs ill Ille world: Illy hl'lll'llh.ll Mt Everest is 8,848
Illcters high is about Mt EVl'rl'St. Tlll'mi,'s 01 til" 'liholllm'ss' of mental states are
l'allt-d 'theories of content', and Wl' ,lisl'lIss IIWllflt'S of mntent in Chapter 9. It is

----- page break -----

1 8 I PH I L O S O P H Y O F MIND
not entirely out of the question that nonphysical states could be about things in
the world; nevertheless, we don't at present have a dualist theory of content.
Finally, let's consider item (6) . Why should states of a nonphysical mind be
correlated with states of the physical brain? According to substance dualism, the
brain plays a crucial role in mediating between the world and the nonphysical
mind. Perceptual information about the world is conveyed to the mind via the
brain, and instructions to move in cer


tain ways are conveyed from the mind to the
body via the brain. Consequently, the existence of correlations between mental
states and brain states is not entirely unexpected. However, we know that damage
to certain parts of the brain causes deficits of reasoning. In other words, we know
that there are correlations between reasoning processes and certain brain states.
According to substance dualism, though, reasoning occurs entirely in the soul. The
correlations between reasoning processes and brain states are thus an embarrass
ment to substance dualism.
So far I have argued that substance dualism has little to say about the six items
on our list. Moreover, there is little reason to expect that the explanatory situation
will change. There simply are no obvious ways of developing nonphysicalist
theories of perception, thought, action, or consciousness. In contrast, we shall see
in later chapters that there are at least the beginnings of physicalist theories of
most of the items on the list. Moreover, there are reasons to think that those
physicalist theories might be developed in coming years.
The relative lack of explanatory power of substance dualism is, in my view, the
most decisive reason available for discarding substance dualism. We should
endorse the theory of mental states which most helps us understand the place
of minds in the world, and substance dualism does very little to advance that
u ndersta nding.
1.4
Property dualism
So far in this chapter we have largely been concerned with substance dualism. In
this section I will briefly discuss an alternative kind of dualism-property dualism.
We haven't said very much yet about the distinction between substances and
properties. For our purposes, a substance is something which could be the only thing
in the universe. My body is therefore a substance, for we can easily imagine a uni
Vl'lW which contains only my body. On the other hand, having a mass (roughly,
wl'lMht ) of 80 kg is not a substance, for we cannot imagine a universe which contains
140 kM IIlId nothing else: there would have to be something else in the universe
whkh hnd that mass. (This way of defining 'substance' is due to David Armstrong
(I ')tIIl: 7), 1'111 not entirely happy with it, but it will do for present purposes.)

----- page break -----

D U A LISM I 1 9
We have seen that my body is a substance whereas having a mass of 80 kg is not.
Having a mass of 80 kg is a property. Say that my body weighs 80 kg. Then one of
my body's properties is having a mass of 80 kg. More generally: substances have
properties.
Here are a few more examples. My car is a substance: we can imagine a universe
which contains nothing but my car. One of my car's properties is being white.
Another is having four tires. And a third is having the license plate 'UZR 155'. The
Australian one-dollar coin in my pocket is a substance. It has various properties
including being gold colored; being minted in 1 998; and being in my pocket.
With the distinction between substance and property in place, we can now turn
to the doctrine of property dualism. According to property dualism, mental states
are nonphysical properties of the brain. The brain is a physical substance with vari
ous physical properties. For example, the typical human brain weighs about one
kilogram; contains billions of neurons; has a blood supply; and so forth. That much
is common ground. What's radical about property .dualism is that it


claims that,
besides all of these physical properties, the brain has some nonphysical properties.
These include being conscious; being in pain; believing that it is Monday; and
wishing that it were Friday. In short, mental states are nonphysical properties of
the brain.
There are various kinds of property dualism, but here we will focus on one espe
cially important sort: epiphenomenal property dualism. Since 'epiphenomenal
property dualism' is a bit of a mouthful, I will just say 'epiphenomenalism'.
According to epiphenomenalism, physical properties of the brain cause non
physical properties of the brain, but not vice versa. Consider again the example of
seeing a lion (Section 1 . 1 ) . According to epiphenomenalism, light waves from the
lion stimulate Bloggs's retina in a certain way, and that in turn causes his brain to
be activated in a certain way. In other words, his brain is caused to have a particu
lar physical property-the property of being activated in a certain way. Bloggs's
brain's having the physical property of being activated in that way causes it to have
the nonphysical property of thinking 'LION! '
S o far we have seen that, according t o epiphenomenalism, mental states are non
physical properties of the brain which are brought about by physical properties of
the brain. The distinctive feature of epiphenomenalism is that the nonphysical
properties of the brain do not, in turn, bring about physical states of the brain.
Bloggs's 'LION! ' thought has no causal powers-it doesn't do anyth ing. But if his
'LION ! ' thought doesn't do anything, it does not cause him to run away. What, then,
makes Bloggs run away when he sees a lion? According to epiphenomenalism, it is
ph ysical states of his brain alone which cause him to run away. So the full story
a ccord ing to epiphenomeIl.alism is this. Light waves strike Bloggs's retina and
('a u s t' his hra i n \0 hl' activated in a certain way. Call the physical property of having

----- page break -----

20 I P H I L O S O P H Y O F M I N D
Nonphysical
LION!
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
?.
p
 . (cid:3)
Physical
Figure 1 .1 A diagrammatic representation of epiphenomenalism, The arrows represent the
causal relation, with the arrowhead located at the effect
the brain activated in a certain way 'P'. P has two effects. First, it causes Bloggs's
brain to have the nonphysical property of thinking 'LION! '. Second, it causes his
legs to move so that he runs away. Figure 1 . 1 illustrates epiphenomenal property
dualism.
It's important to stress that, according to epiphenomenalism, mental states are
causally inert. My thought 'LION! ' does nothing. What causes me to run away is a
state of my brain.
1.5
Assessing epiphenomenalism
We saw in Section 1.3 that substance dualism faces three major difficulties:
(i) Princess Elizabeth's problem; (ii) the explanatory completeness of physi
ology; and (iii) the explanatory weakness of substance dualism. Each of these
problems also arises-in some form or other-for epiphenomenalism. Because the
problems faced by epiphenomenalism overlap to a large extent the problems faced
by substance dualism, my discussion of the former will be relatively brief. For
more details, refer back to Section 1 . 3.
I . Princess Elizabeth 's problem. Princess Elizabeth pointed out that there is a
tens




n doubt see his
Discourse on the Method, Part 4 (Descartes 1 970: 3 1 -2 ) . Princess Elizabeth's objec
tion can be found in one of her letters to Descartes, dated 6-1 6 May 1 643
( Descartes 1 970: 274-5 ) . (Note: Several good translations of Descartes' philosoph
Il'a l writings are available. Don't feel obliged to use the one to which I refer. ) A
good discussion of Descartes on substance dualism is Smith and Jones 1 986: Ch. 3.
In Section 1 .2 I mentioned contemporary theories of language. Pinker 1 994 is a
h ighly readable introduction to this fascinating area . In Section 1 . 3 I mentioned
t ilt' possibility of providing a complete physical account of human movement.
A n ke introduction to the neuroscience of movement is Kosslyn and Koenig
1 <)<)2 : Ch, 7.
TUTO R IAL Q U ESTI O N S
( I ) Descrihe su hslil lKe d ual ism . (Use a picture i f i t helps. )
(2) What is Ll' i h n i ".'s pri n ci ple or the indiscernibility o f identicals?

----- page break -----

24 I PHI LOSOPHY OF MI N D
(3) I n your view, are there things which minds can d o but physical objects could
not achieve?
(4) What does it mean to say that physiology is explanatorily complete? How
does the explanatory completeness of physiology pose a threat to substance
dualism?
( 5 ) How did Descartes establish that he can doubt the existence of his body?
(6) Describe property dualism.
(7) Describe epiphenomenalism.
(8) Give an argument against epiphenomenalism.

=== Nagel — Death ===

ugh it is easy enough to imagine
 oneself, from the outside, in either of those conditions). Yet people
 who are averse to death are not usually averse to unconsciousness
 (so long as it does not entail a substantial cut in the total duration
 of waking life).
 If we are to make sense of the view that to die is bad, it must
 be on the ground that life is a good and death is the corresponding
 deprivation or loss, bad not because of any positive features but
 because of the desirability of what it removes. We must now turn
 to the serious difficulties which this hypothesis raises, difficulties
 about loss and privation in general, and about death in particular.
 Essentially there are three types of problem. First, doubt may
 be raised whether anything can be bad for a man without being
 positively unpleasant to him: specifically, it may be doubted that
 there are any evils which consist merely in the deprivation or ab-
 sence of possible goods, and which do not depend on someone's
This content downloaded from
 192.58.125.24 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 16:04:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 76 NOUS
 minding that deprivation. Secondly, there are special difficulties, in
 the case of death, about how the supposed misfortune is to be
 assigned to a subject at all. There is doubt both as to who its sub-
 ject is, and as to when he undergoes it. So long as a person exists,
 he has not yet died, and once he has died, he no longer exists; so
 there seems to be no time when death, if it is a misfortune, can be
 ascribed to its unfortunate subject. The third type of difficulty con-
 cerns the asymmetry, mentioned above, between our attitudes to
 posthumous and prenatal nonexistence. How can the former be bad
 if the latter is not?
 It should be recognized that if these are valid objections to
 counting death as an evil, they will apply to many other supposed
 evils as well. The first type of objection is expressed in general form
 by the common remark that what you don't know can't hurt you. It
 means that even if a man is betrayed by his friends, ridiculed be-
 hind his back, and despised by people who treat him politely to his
 face, none of it can be counted as a misfortune for him so long as he
 does not suffer as a result. It means that a man is not injured if his
 wishes are ignored by the executor of his will, or if, after his death,
 the belief becomes current that all the literary works on which his
 fame rests were really written by his brother, who died in Mexico
 at the age of twenty-eight. It seems to me worth asking what as-
 sumptions about good and evil lead to these drastic restrictions.
 All the questions have something to do with time. There cer-
 tainly are goods and evils of a simple kind (including some pleasures
 and pains) which a person possesses at a given time simply in
 virtue of his condition at that time. But this is not true of all the
 things we regard as good or bad for a man. Often we need to know
 his history to tell whether something is a misfortune or not; this
 applies to ills like deterioration, deprivation, and damage. Some-
 times his experiential state is relatively unimportant-as in the case
 of a man who wastes his life in the cheerful pursuit of a method of
 communicating with asparagus plants. Someone who holds that all
 goods and evils must be temporally assignable states of the person
 may of course try to bring difficult cases into



e usual sort, and
 circumstances which may not coincide with him either in space or
 in time. A man's life includes much that does not transpire within
 the boundaries of his body and his mind, and what happens to him
 can include much that does not take place within the boundaries of
 his life. These boundaries are commonly crossed by the misfortunes
 of being deceived, or despised, or betrayed. (If this is correct, there
 is a simple account of what is wrong with breaking a deathbed
 promise. It is an injury to the dead man. For certain purposes it is
 possible to regard time as just another type of distance.) The case
 of mental degeneration shows us an evil that depends on a contrast
 between the reality and the possible alternatives. A man is the sub-
 ject of good and evil as much because he has hopes which may or
 may not be fulfilled, or possibilities which may or may not be
 realized, as because of his capacity to suffer and enjoy. If death is
 an evil, it must be accounted for in these terms, and the impossi-
 bility of locating it within life should not trouble us.
 When a man dies we are left with his corpse, and while a
 corpse can suffer the kind of mishap that may occur to an article of
 furniture, it is not a suitable object for pity. The man, however, is.
 He has lost his life, and if he had not died, he would have continued
 to live it, and to possess whatever good there is in living. If we apply
 to death the account suggested for the case of dementia, we shall
 say that although the spatial and temporal locations of the individual
 who suffered the loss are clear enough, the misfortune itself cannot
 be so easily located. One must be content just to state that his life is
 over and there will never be any more of it. That fact, rather than
 his past or present condition, constitutes his misfortune, if it is one.
 Nevertheless if there is a loss, someone must suffer it, and he must
 have existence and specific spatial and temporal location even if the
 loss itself does not. The fact that Beethoven had no children may
 have been a cause of regret to him, or a sad thing for the world, but
 it cannot be described as a misfortune for the children that he never
 had. All of us, I believe, are fortunate to have been born. But unless
 good and ill can be assigned to an embryo, or even to an uncon-
 nected pair of gametes, it cannot be said that not to be born is a
 misfortune. (That is a factor to be considered in deciding whether
 abortion and contraception are akin to murder.)
 This approach also provides a solution to the problem of
 temporal asymmetry, pointed out by Lucretius. He observed that
This content downloaded from
 192.58.125.24 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 16:04:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 DEAM 79
 no one finds it disturbing to contemplate the eternity preceding his
 own birth, and he took this to show that it must be irrational to fear
 death, since death is simply the mirror image of the prior abyss.
 That is not true, however, and the difference between the two ex-
 plains why it is reasonable to regard them differently. It is true that
 both the time before a man's birth and the time after his death are
 times when he does not exist. But the time after his death is time of
 which his death deprives him. It is time in which, had he not died
 then, he would be alive. Therefore any death entails the loss of
 some life that its victim woul


d have led had he not died at that or
 any earlier point. We know perfectly well what it would be for him
 to have had it instead of losing it, and there is no difficulty in iden-
 tifying the loser.
 But we cannot say that the time prior to a man's birth is time
 in which he would have lived had he been born not then but earlier.
 For aside from the brief margin permitted by premature labor, he
 could not have been born earlier: anyone born substantially earlier
 than he was would have been someone else. Therefore the time prior
 to his birth is not time in which his subsequent birth prevents him
 from living. His birth, when it occurs, does not entail the loss to him
 of any life whatever.
 The direction of time is crucial in assigning possibilities to
 people or other individuals. Distinct possible lives of a single person
 can diverge from a common beginning, but they cannot converge
 to a common conclusion from diverse beginnings. (The latter would
 represent not a set of different possible lives of one individual, but a
 set of distinct possible individuals, whose lives have identical con-
 clusions.) Given an identifiable individual, countless possibilities
 for his continued existence are imaginable, and we can clearly con-
 ceive of what it would be for him to go on existing indefinitely.
 However inevitable it is that this will not come about, its possi-
 bility is still that of the continuation of a good for him, if life is the
 good we take it to be.
 We are left, therefore, with the question whether the non-
 realization of this possibility is in every case a misfortune, or
 whether it depends on what can naturally be hoped for. This seems
 to me the most serious difficulty with the view that death is always
 an evil. Even if we can dispose of the objections against admitting
 misfortune that is not experienced, or cannot be assigned to a def-
 inite time in the person's life, we still have to set some limits on
 how possible a possibility must be for its nonrealization to be a
This content downloaded from
 192.58.125.24 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 16:04:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 80 NOUS
 misfortune, (or good fortune, should the possibility be a bad one.)
 The death of Keats at 24 is generally regarded as tragic; that of
 Tolstoy at 82 is not. Although they will both be dead forever, Keats's
 death deprived him of many years of life which were allowed to
 Tolstoy; so in a clear sense Keats's loss was greater, (though not in
 the sense standardly employed in mathematical comparison between
 infinite quantities.) However, this does not prove that Tolstoy's
 loss was insignificant. Perhaps we record an objection only to evils
 which are gratuitiously added to the inevitable; the fact that it is
 worse to die at 24 than at 82 does not imply that it is not a terrible
 thing to die at 82, or even at 806. The question is whether we can
 regard as a misfortune any limitation, like mortality, that is normal
 to the species. Blindness is not a misfortune for a mole, nor would
 it be for a man, if that were the natural condition of the human race.
 The trouble is that life familiarizes us with the goods of which
 death deprives us. If we put aside doubts about their status as goods
 and grant that their quantity is in part a function of their duration,
 the question remains whether death, no matter when it occurs, can
 be said to deprive its victim of what is


in the relevant sense a possi-
 ble continuation of life. The situation is an ambiguous one. Observed
 from without, human beings obviously have a natural lifespan and
 cannot live much longer than a hundred years. A man's sense of his
 own experience, on the other hand, does not embody this idea of a
 natural limit. His existence defines for him an essentially open-ended
 possible future, containing the usual mixture of goods and evils that
 he has found so tolerable in the past. Having been gratuitously
 introduced to the world by a collection of natural, historical, and
 social accidents, he finds himself the subject of a life, with an
 indeterminate and not essentially limited future. Viewed in this
 way, death, no matter how inevitable, is an abrupt cancellation of
 indefinitely extensive possible goods. Normality seems to have noth-
 ing to do with it, for the fact that we will all inevitably die in a few
 score years cannot by itself imply that it would not be good to live
 longer. If there is no limit to the amount of life that it would be
 good to have, then it may be that a bad end is in store for us all.
This content downloaded from
 192.58.125.24 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 16:04:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

=== Ned Block — Wittgenstein and Qualia (2007) ===

rticularity about the way that I see green that is different from the way others
 may see green. Similarly, I can refer to the content of a thought as "the content
 of the thought I had at 11:33 AM" without fully capturing its content.2
 We have a notion of the content of an utterance or thought which can be
 fully captured without specifying anything about modes of presentation. If I say
 "Napoleon is buried in Paris," we can fully capture an important content of
 that utterance by saying it is the content that Napoleon is buried in Paris, even
 though that way of putting it does not attempt to specify my eccentric ways of
 thinking of Napoleon and Paris. But the experiential aspect of the content of an
 experience just is a kind of mode of presentation, so a notion of the content of
 an experience that left out the mode of presentation would be defective.
 Note that I am assuming color realism, i.e. that there are facts about the
 colors of things and those facts involve things having colors, for example that
 fire hydrants are often red and grass is often green. This position contrasts with
 error theories that say that nothing really is colored but rather color involves
 an erroneous projection of mental properties onto the world (Boghossian &
 Velleman, 1989, 1991).
 In other work, I have defined qualia as qualities of experience that cannot be
 defined in terms of their representational,3 functional4 or cognitive properties.
 And I have used the inverted spectrum hypothesis (Block, 1990, 1994, 1999;
 Block & Fodor, 1972) in those arguments. The word 'qualia' is often used to
 indicate a feature of our experience whose existence is disputed. Here the focus
 is on the ineffability of experience, and so it is convenient to use the term
 'qualia' to denote features of experience that have the kind of ineffability just
 mentioned.5
 2. Two Inverted Spectrum Hypotheses
 "Wittgenstein's Notes for Lectures on "Private Experience" and "Sense
 Data"" (Wittgenstein, 1968) were written in English, apparently between 1934
 and 1936 (Rhees, 1968). Wittgenstein is notoriously difficult to interpret, even to
 the extent that scholars cannot agree whether claims that are clearly formulated
 in his writings are being asserted or denied?or neither. I will put forward
 an interpretation of Wittgenstein's view of the inverted spectrum hypothesis
 and of the nature of sensory experience, not as a proposal that meets the
 standards of Wittgenstein scholarship, but rather as a suggestion in a recognizably
 Wittgensteinian framework that is worthy of discussion (and refutation) on its
 own merits. When I attribute a view to Wittgenstein, you may wish to understand
 that as "Wittgenstein-according-to-one-non-expert". The seeming endorsement
 of the possibility or at least coherence of one kind of spectrum inversion (the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 75
 kind I am calling "innocuous") begins in this passage6:
 The normal use of the expression "he sees [red] where ..." is this: we take it as
 the criterion for meaning the same by 'red' as we do, that as a rule he agrees
 with us in giving the same names to the colours of objects as we do. If then in a
 particular instance he says something is red where we should say that it's green,
 we say he sees it different from us.
 Notice how in

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

such a case we would behave. We should look for a cause of his
 different judgment, and if we had found one we should certainly be inclined
 to say he saw red where we saw green. It is further clear that even before ever
 finding such a [[284]] cause we might under circumstances be inclined to say this.
 But also that we can't give a strict rule for...
 Consider this case: someone says "it's queer/I can't understand it/, I see
 everything red blue today and vice versa." We answer "it must look queer!'"
 He says it does and, e.g., goes on to say how cold the glowing coal looks
 and how warm the clear (blue) sky. I think we should under these or similar
 circumstances] be inclined] to say that he saw red what we saw [blue].7 And
 again we should say that we know that he means by the words 'blue' and 'red'
 what we do as he has always used them as we do."
 I will be arguing that the kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis that
 Wittgenstein endorses (as possible or at least coherent) in this passage commits
 him to something he would not agree with, so a defender of Wittgenstein
 might respond that after proper consideration, Wittgenstein would not have
 endorsed it.8 However, I think what Wittgenstein describes here is obviously
 coherent. Further, subsequent technological developments have shown that
 something near enough is possible, even technically feasible now. Colors are
 easily reversed in digital television. I myself have appeared, inverted in color,
 in an interview on a German television station. And it is feasible right now
 for virtual reality goggles to make use of such technology in producing that
 inversion experience in a subject. With a relatively small investment, such virtual
 reality goggles could be produced now. I think most vision scientists would
 agree that the same transformations could in principle be accomplished by
 circuits embedded between the eye and the brain, although no one knows how
 to do this now. (I will describe this science fiction scenario as having "wires
 crossed" in the visual system, a terminology that I think derives from Putnam
 (1981, p. 80).)
 Later in these notes (p. 316 of Rhees, p. 285 of Stern), Wittgenstein confirms
 the endorsement and introduces the version of the inverted spectrum hypothesis
 that he rejects?what I will call the "dangerous" type. (This is my terminology,
 not Wittgenstein's?I mean dangerous for a Wittgensteinian point of view.)
 .. .We said that there were cases in which we should say that the person sees
 green what I see red. Now the question suggests itself: if this can be so at all,
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 76 / Ned Block
 why should it [not] be always the case? It seems, if once we have admitted that it
 can happen under peculiar circumstances, that it may always happen. But then
 it is clear that the very idea of seeing red loses its use if we can never know if the
 other does not see something utterly different. So what are we to do: Are we to
 say that this can only happen in a limited number of cases? This is a very serious
 situation.?We introduced the expression that A sees something else than B and
 we mustn't forget that this had use only under the circumstances under which we
 introduced it.9 Consider the proposition]: "Of course we never know whether
 new circ[umstance]s wouldn't show that after all

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

he saw what we see." Remember
 that this whole notion need not have been introduced. "But can't I imagine all
 blind men to see as well as I do and only behaving differently; and on the other
 hand imagine them really blind? For if I can imagine these possibilities, then the
 question, even if never answerable makes sense." Imagine a man, say W, now
 blind, now seeing, and observe what you do? How do these images give sense to
 the question? They don't, and you see that the expression stands and falls with
 its usefulness.
 The idea that the other person sees something else than I, [[317]] is only
 introduced to account for certain expressions: whereas it seems that this idea
 can exist without any reference to expressions. "Surely what I have he too can
 have."10
 Note the words "We said that there were cases..." suggesting that those cases
 are coherently describable and perhaps possible. What is the difference between
 the innocuous and dangerous cases? In the innocuous case, colors are inverted but
 certain properties of them?warm and cool?are not, and this happens suddenly
 to someone whose color experience has been normal before. So it is detectable
 because of two significant changes: (1) Things the subject knows to be red such
 as hot coals and blood look green and things the subject knows to be green such
 as grass look red and (2) blood suddenly seems cool colored and grass seems
 warm colored. The dangerous scenario is widespread and is not behaviorally
 detectable.
 There is an immediate problem in figuring out what is supposed to be
 happening in the dangerous scenario. The most straightforward way for the
 innocuous case to become widespread would be if the odd thing that happened
 to the subject of the innocuous inverted spectrum scenario simply happened
 repeatedly, the result being many inverted people who saw blood as green and
 cool-colored and grass as red and warm-colored and were aware of this fact about
 their vision. But that is not what Wittgenstein intends in the dangerous scenario,
 since he takes the dangerous scenario to be one that is behaviorally ind?tectable.
 He says about the dangerous scenario that "we can never know if the other does
 not see something utterly different." Perhaps the odd thing that happened to the
 subject in the innocuous scenario is supposed to have happened at or before birth
 in the dangerous scenario. Then one might suppose that inversion is widespread
 but not detectable because the inverted people have not experienced a change
 and they have learned to use color words and the word 'cool' in conjunction
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 11
 with the color experiences they get on seeing, e.g. grass. So one might take the
 dangerous scenario to be one in which warm and cool are supposed to be inverted
 along with the colors themselves (Block, 1990, footnote 16; Levine, 1991), and
 in which the subject has no memories of things having looked differently in the
 past.
 3. The Inner Arena Model
 This paper started life as a comment on a chapter of Paul Horwich's book in
 progress on Wittgenstein (Horwich, in progress). Horwich?like Wittgenstein?
 contrasts a form of inverted spectrum involving experiential contents that can
 be captured in ordinary language with another form of inverted spectrum which
 cannot, and

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

so, in my terms involves qualia. I am grateful to Horwich and his
 chapter for inspiring me to try to elaborate the case for qualia from considerations
 of inverted and shifted spectra?the subject of this paper.
 Horwich, interpreting and elaborating Wittgenstein's ideas, argues that (what
 I would call) the dangerous inverted spectrum hypothesis presupposes a private
 arena model according to which experiences take place that are observed directly
 by the person whose arena it is, but only indirectly by others. And awareness of
 experience is not just a matter of having the experience. On Horwich's account,
 the private arena model motivates a conception of experience as essentially
 subjective and ethereal and not constituted by anything objective and concrete.
 He contrasts these ideas unfavorably with the claim that the meaning-constituting
 use of "I am in pain" should be taken instead to be an expressive use in which
 those words are substituted for a natural expression of pain. On this account,
 the reference of 'pain' is not involved in fixing the meaning of the term. He also
 links the private arena model to the idea that there must be determinate answers
 to questions about the sensations of others, e.g. whether computers can have
 pains. A related view of the "Cartesian Theater" has been advocated by Dennett
 (1991).
 I will argue that an inner arena model has little to do with the argument for
 inverted or shifted spectra.
 It is not easy to find contemporary philosophers who have argued for the
 possibility of an inverted spectrum and who can also reasonably be said to accept
 a private arena model. D. M. Armstrong (1968; Bacon, Campbell, & Reinhardt,
 1993, reply to Martin) accepts a perceptual model of introspection and something
 that might be called an inverted spectrum, but the issue is complicated by his
 eliminativism about experiential qualities. Sydney Shoemaker (1982) has argued
 strongly for the possibility of an inverted spectrum but equally strongly against an
 observational model of introspection (1994b; 1996b, including footnotes not in
 the journal version). As Shoemaker notes, it is not clear that even Locke accepted
 an observational model of perception, given that his theory of perception involves
 causal signals from external objects affecting sense organs so as to produce ideas
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 78 / Ned Block
 in our minds that represent those external objects. This is a reliable but fallible
 process as contrasted with introspection, in which for Locke there is no gap
 between appearance and reality.
 Shoemaker gives a detailed analysis of what is wrong with various obser
 vational models of introspection. For example, perception involves an organ of
 perception but there is no organ of introspection; perception involves experiences
 of what is perceived but there are no experiences of experiences in introspection;
 there are not different introspective perspectives on the same experiences in
 the way that there are different perceptual perspectives on the same perceived
 object; the relation between the pain and the introspective belief about it is
 more intimate than an observational relation: the pain is more like a part of the
 introspective belief than a reliable cause of it; the objects of perception often
 exist completely independentl

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

y of the perception of them and the perceivers
 who perceive them, but what is introspected cannot be independent of the
 introspection and introspector in this way. Shoemaker emphasizes a version of
 the self-intimating nature of experience in relation to introspection which has no
 analog in observation. His overall viewpoint provides a serious challenge to the
 idea that a dangerous inverted spectrum necessarily involves an observational
 model of introspection.
 I am another example of someone who argues for an inverted spectrum
 but does not accept the observational model of introspection. I agree with the
 points just mentioned about what is wrong with the observational model of
 introspection, but unlike Shoemaker, I think that one can attend to one's own
 experiences. (And in that respect, my view is more like an observational model
 than Shoemaker's.) Shoemaker's view is shared by Fred Dretske (1995), Gilbert
 Harman (1990), Michael Tye (1995; 2000) and many others who advocate what
 G. E. Moore termed the diaphanousness (or sometimes the transparency) of
 experience. Harman (1990) puts the point by saying that the more one tries
 to attend to one's experience of the tree, the more one attends to the real tree
 instead. Although Moore is sometimes cited as the originator of this point, he
 did not actually accept it. I have heard him quoted saying "... the moment we
 try to fix our attention upon consciousness and to see what, distinctly, it is, it
 seems to vanish: it seems as if we had before us a mere emptiness. When we try
 to introspect the sensation of blue, all we can see is the blue; the other element
 is as if it were diaphanous." But these words are followed by what I regard as a
 more significant truth: "Yet it can be distinguished if we look attentively enough,
 and know that there is something to look for." (See Amy Kind's treatment in her
 2003.)
 If we want to appreciate the case for the claim that we can attend to our
 own experiences, we would do well to avoid examples like Harman's in which one
 is looking at a tree, trying to attend to one's experience instead of the tree. An
 example I have used (1995): you are engaged in an intense conversation, realizing
 suddenly that for some time, you have been hearing street-drilling outside and
 have even raised your voice to compensate for it. At the moment of the sudden
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 79
 realization, you switch at least some of your attention to the experience of the
 sound, and not just to the sound itself. For another type of example, consider
 the difference between blurry vision as of something, say a movie, whose lines
 may be clear and crisp, as contrasted with clear and crisp vision of a blurry
 movie (Block, 1996, 2003). There is an introspectible difference that cannot be
 appreciated without attending to the experience as well as to what the experience
 is of. What we experience is closely tied to what concepts we bring to bear in
 experience and introspective experience is no exception. Of course these examples
 are the beginning of an argument, not the end.11
 Another way in which I differ from the private arena model as sketched by
 Horwich is that I do not take experience to resist objective concrete constitution.
 The view of qualia advocated here is, at least ac

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

cording to me, fully compatible
 with physicalism. I also doubt that the private arena model motivates the claim
 that experience resists objective concrete constitution. I take Dennett's (1991)
 Cartesian materialist picture (a picture Dennett argues against) to be one that
 combines a private arena view with materialism.
 Still another way in which I differ from the private arena model at least in
 Horwich's version is that I do not think that questions about other minds need
 have determinate answers. An example that I have given elsewhere (2002) is that
 belief in qualia does not require a determinate fact of the matter as to whether
 fish have qualia.
 Horwich takes the difference between the innocuous and dangerous inversion
 hypotheses to be the difference between a case that can be described in public
 language with expressions like "smelling a rose", "painful" and the like, and
 a case that requires a private way of describing experience not expressible in
 public language. In my terms, the difference is qualia. He takes the rules of use
 for mentalistic expressions to dictate that your experience when you look at red
 things in normal circumstances is just like mine. There can be no further question
 of what it is like for you to see red as compared with me. To ask what looking red
 is like is like asking how long five feet is. Here, I disagree, as will become clear in
 the sections below on shifted spectra and inverted spectra. Horwich argues that
 the dangerous form of the inverted spectrum hypothesis derives from the internal
 arena model, especially the conflation of first person sensation reports?which
 he construes as expressions of sensation (on the model of natural expressions
 of pain)?with observations. Certainly I and other contemporary advocates of
 inverted spectra do not accept key tenets of the internal arena model and the
 observational view of introspection. Of course, what one explicitly advocates and
 what one presupposes are two different things. In introducing a materialistic
 version of the "Cartesian Theater", Dennett (1991, p. 107) allows that "Perhaps
 no one today explicitly endorses" such an idea. Indeed, "Many theorists would
 insist that they have explicitly rejected such an obviously bad idea". But, he
 insists, the picture he has sketched nonetheless plays a behind-the-scenes role.
 And perhaps Horwich would suppose something of this sort too. But Horwich
 and Dennett give no reasons for thinking that actual contemporary arguments for
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 80 / Ned Block
 the possibility of dangerous inverted spectra really do presuppose the mistaken
 models.
 In my view, Wittgensteinians who emphasize the observational model
 of qualia are barking up the wrong tree. The view of qualia that leads to
 the epistemic problems that exercise Wittgensteinians is that that there are
 determinate facts of qualia independently of our cognitive access to those facts.
 A Wittgensteinian might call it the "inner light" model.12
 4. Intrasubjective vs. Intersubjective
 Let us now return to the issue of what the difference is between the innocuous
 and dangerous inverted spectrum scenarios. Philosophers have made much of the
 difference between an intrasubjective spectrum inversion?in which a person at
 one time is said to be inverted with respect to the

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

same person at another time?
 and an inter subjective spectrum inversion in which one person is said to be
 inverted with respect to another. (See (Putnam, 1981; Shoemaker, 1982, 1996a).)
 The key dialectical difference can be explained as follows. Suppose we have a
 pair of identical twins at birth, one of whom has had the wires crossed in his
 visual system. The twins are raised normally and acquire color terminology in
 the normal way. On the point of view that I favor, we may suppose that it is
 possible that the way red things (which they agree are red) look to one twin is
 the same as the way green things (which they agree are green) look to the other.
 Now a vulnerability in this line of thought stems from the following objection
 (Block, 1990, 1994; Harman, 1990).
 Notice that it is not possible that the brain state that one twin has when
 he sees things that both twins call "red" is exactly the same as the brain state
 that the other twin has when he sees things that they both call "green". At
 least, the total brain states can't be the same, since the first causes the subject
 to say "It's red", and to classify what he is seeing as the same color as blood
 and fire hydrants, whereas the second causes the other twin to say "It's green",
 and to classify what he is seeing with grass and Granny Smith apples. Here is an
 example. Suppose that the color-relevant brain state that one twin (the one who
 had no operation) has when he sees red things and that the other has when he
 sees green things is R-oscillations in area V4, whereas the color-relevant brain
 reaction in the first twin to green and to the second twin to red is G-oscillations
 in area V4. If the proponent of the possibility of an inverted spectrum says
 this is evidence for inversion, the objector can say that phenomenal properties
 should not be thought to be based in brain states that are quite so "localized"
 as R-oscillations in V4 or G-oscillations in V4, given that R oscillations lead to
 different reports in the different twins. Rather color experience should be seen as
 based in more holistic brain states that include the brain bases of reporting and
 classification behavior. (I am assuming agreement on an extremely weak form of
 physicalism.13) Thus the objector whom I am thinking of will want to say that
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 81
 one twin's holistic brain state that includes R-oscillations and the other twin's
 holistic brain state that includes G-oscillations are just alternative realizations of
 the same experiential state: that experiential state has a disjunctive realization.
 So the fact that red things cause R-oscillations in one twin but G-oscillations in
 the other doesn't show that their experiences are inverted.
 Of course the local G to R transition is a transition in the way things
 look. However, that experiential difference has only been demonstrated intra
 subjectively, keeping constant the larger brain state that specifies the roles of
 R and G-oscillations in classifying things. The R/G difference in each subject
 is a color experience difference, but this gives us no knowledge of cross-person
 comparisons. The objector can insist on typing brain states for inter-personal
 comparisons holistically. And most friends of the inverted spectrum are in a
 poor posit

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

ion to insist on typing experiential states locally rather than holistically,
 given that they normally emphasize the "explanatory gap", the fact that there
 is nothing known about the brain that can adequately explain the facts of
 experience. So the friend of the inverted spectrum is in no position to insist
 on local physiological individuation of qualia. At this stage, the debate seems a
 standoff, and that is where the intrasubjective inverted spectrum comes into the
 picture.14
 The intrasubjective inverted spectrum scenario can be seen as a way for
 the defender of the inverted spectrum to evade this objection, for if the change
 happens in the life of an individual person, we have introspective and behavioral
 evidence of an inversion and so can avoid the issue of whether brain states should
 be thought of in a localistic or holistic manner (Block, 1990, 1994; Shoemaker,
 1982).
 I agree with this superiority of the intrasubjective inverted spectrum scenario,
 and will be pursing it in detail later. But for now, my point is that the intra vs.
 inter difference is not directly involved in the difference between the innocuous
 and the dangerous inverted spectrum. What is involved, as I will be arguing, is
 whether the inverted pair are both normal, since that is what is relevant to the
 expressibility of phenomenal character in public language.15
 5. Normality
 So what is the difference between the "innocuous" inverted spectrum case,
 the one Wittgenstein regards as at least coherent, and the "dangerous" case,
 the one that he rejects? One difference is that the innocuous case occurs
 suddenly and "under peculiar circumstances:" the subject agrees that fire and
 the sky now "look queer"; whereas in the dangerous case "it may always
 happen", even not under peculiar circumstances. Another difference is that the
 innocuous case is behaviorally different because the subject says, e.g. coal looks
 cool colored, whereas what Wittgenstein is suggesting in the dangerous case is
 an inverted person who is not behaviorally different. I would guess that the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 82 / Ned Block
 behavioral indetectability of the dangerous inversion was extremely important
 to Wittgenstein's rejection of it. (This comes out in the second quote from
 Wittgenstein together with the passage in footnote 10.)
 However, there is another difference that does not depend on behavioral
 indetectability, and this difference is the one I am going to focus on here. I will
 argue that the dangerous scenario can be used to argue for qualia even if it is
 behaviorally detectable. Qualia, you will recall, are features of experience that are
 not expressible in ordinary language, including terms for properties of objects.
 One cannot express what red things look like colorwise in normal circumstances
 using color terms as in "looks red", since things that look the way red things look
 to me (in normal circumstances) may look to you the way green things look to me.
 So among qualia are ways things can look red. Something might look red to two
 people in different ways. And I think a crucial difference between the innocuous
 and dangerous cases that is relevant to qualia, is whether normal people (or one
 normal person at different times) in normal circumstances can be said to be color
 inverted or shifted

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

with respect to one another. In the innocuous case, the color
 inverted person is abnormal. But if "one section of mankind has one sensation of
 red and another section another," (Wittgenstein, 1958, Section 272, p. 95) then it
 would seem that normal people can have inverted color experience with respect
 to one another, and that is enough to produce a "very serious situation."16 Here
 is why.
 It is incoherent to suppose that there are normal people in normal viewing
 circumstances for whom red things look green. To see this, suppose you are
 one of those putatively normal people for whom red things always look green.
 Suppose that you and I agree that there is a difference between us in ways that
 things look color-wise, and that the difference can be described by the locution
 "Things we agree are red look to you the way things we agree are green look to
 me." I say to you that whereas red things look red to me, red things look green
 to you. You can object to the idea that red things look green to you. You can
 reply
 Who says that red things look green to me? Why are you the one for whom red
 things look red? I can with equal justification say that red things look red to me
 and green to you!
 If we are both normal, you have as good a case as I do. Since we are both
 normal, the right response is that neither you nor I have a superior claim to be
 the one for whom red things look red and green things look green. The situation
 is relevantly symmetrical. What we should say instead is that the way red things
 look to me is the same as the way green things look to you, and in allowing that
 there are ways things look that cannot be expressed in terms of "looking red"
 or "looking green" or any phrase of the form "looking F" where F is a color
 name, we step into the realm of qualia. (Given what I mean by 'qualia', this is
 definitional.)
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 83
 Using the familiar "what is like" terminology (Farrell, 1950; Nagel, 1974),
 the point is that if we acknowledge the existence of an innocuous inverted
 spectrum scenario, we can say that green is what it is like for the abnormal
 person to see red, whereas for the normal person, red is what it is like to see red.
 So the innocuous scenario does not require us to suppose that there are color
 experiences that cannot be expressed in terms of properties of things. However,
 if we allow the existence of a dangerous scenario, in which normal perceivers
 are inverted with respect to one another, we cannot say of either of them that
 green is what it is like to see red. If we acknowledge the existence of an inverted
 spectrum in this sense, we have to agree that no color name expresses what it is
 like for either one of the inverted people to see red. (Whether the existence of a
 dangerous scenario is required for qualia or whether its possibility will do will
 be taken up later.)
 I am not saying that what it is like for them to see red cannot be referred
 to in English. For example, we can refer to it by saying "What it is like for that
 person to see red". What we cannot find is a color name 'F', such that what it is
 like for one of these people to see red can be expressed in the form "looking F",
 and in that sense we can say that the experiential property is an ineffable quale.
 I am also not d

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

enying that Wittgenstein was concerned with the behavioral
 indistinguishability of the persons in the dangerous inverted spectrum case. If
 there could be an inverted but behaviorally indistinguishable pair of people,
 then it is hard to see how the difference between them could be relevant to any
 everyday uses of terms. My point is rather that an inverted pair both members of
 which are normal is problematic for Wittgenstein even if they are not behaviorally
 indistinguishable.
 Sydney Shoemaker (Shoemaker, 1982) distinguishes between intentional and
 qualitative similarity. If something looks red to you and me, then our experiences
 are thereby intentionally similar, but if your spectrum is inverted relative to mine,
 our experiences are thereby qualitatively dissimilar. (Although I have not yet
 argued for the possibility of the dangerous kind of inversion, I will assume it
 here to get the conceptual groundwork in place.) If something looks red both to
 you and to me, our experiences thereby have a shared intentional content, but
 if our spectra are inverted with respect to one another, and if you are looking
 at a red thing and I am looking at a green thing, our experiences have a shared
 qualitative content. Looking red is an intentional content of color experience,
 not a qualitative content. For both members of the inverted pair, red things look
 red and green things look green. Color language in application both to the outer
 and the inner is keyed to intentional contents of experience (Block, 1990). States
 that have qualitative contents are just qualia, and it is the existence of qualitative
 contents that pose the challenge to expressibility in language.
 It may seem from what I have said so far that the issue of qualia is the issue of
 whether the phenomenal character of experience goes beyond its representational
 content, that is, the issue of representationalism, or representationism as I call
 it (Block, 1990, 2003). But that is not the case, as can be seen by a brief
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 84 / Ned Block
 consideration of a view held by Shoemaker (1994a; 1994b) and Michael Thau
 (2002). In Shoemaker's version, the view is that when one looks at a ripe tomato,
 one's experience represents the tomato as having two distinct kinds of color
 relevant properties, as being red and as having a certain "phenomenal property".
 If your spectrum is inverted with respect to mine, and we are looking at different
 items with complementary colors (e.g. you a red thing, me a green thing), our
 experiences represent those items as having the same phenomenal property and
 as having different colors. These phenomenal properties are definable in terms of
 qualia. As far as what I have said so far is concerned, one might think of them
 as qualia projected onto objects?but Shoemaker does not think of them that
 way, since he holds they are causally efficacious, indeed defined in terms of their
 production of qualia. So Shoemaker is a kind of representationist, and that allows
 one to see that one can be both a representationist and a believer in qualia. On
 Shoemaker's view, color experience has two kinds of representational contents.
 One of them is what I have been and will be calling intentional contents, namely
 color-representing representational contents, contents that represent

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

something
 as, e.g. red. But the other kind of representational content (the kind that
 represents phenomenal properties) is not expressible in public language. The
 issue of qualia is not the issue of whether the mental properties of experience can
 be fully captured in terms of what is represented by experience, since it may be
 that what is represented by experience cannot always be fully captured in public
 language.
 We could call the principle that normal perceivers in normal circumstances
 see red things as red, and thus that public language attributions of color
 experience express intentional contents of experience rather than qualitative
 contents the Principle of Normality.17
 Gottlob Frege (Frege, 1884/1953) held a somewhat similar view (quoted in
 Byrne, 2006):
 The word 'white' ordinarily makes us think of a certain sensation, which is, of
 course, entirely subjective; but even in ordinary everyday speech, it often bears,
 I think, an objective sense. When we call snow white, we mean to refer to an
 objective quality which we recognize, in ordinary daylight, by a certain sensation.
 If the snow is being seen in a coloured light, we take that into account in our
 judgement and say, for instance, 'It appears red at present, but it is white.' Even a
 colour-blind man can speak of red and green, in spite of the fact that he does not
 distinguish between these colors in his sensations; he recognizes the distinction
 by the fact that others make it, or perhaps by making a physical experiment.
 Often, therefore, a colour word does not signify our subjective sensation, which
 we cannot know to agree with anyone else's (for obviously calling things by the
 same name does not guarantee as much), but rather an objective quality. (?26)
 And, although my interpretation is not standard, one can see Wittgenstein's
 beetle in the box passage as compatible with a similar view.18 The idea would
 be that the thing in the box?a quale?is irrelevant to the language game, which
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 85
 involves only what I am calling intentional contents (that is, color-representing
 contents). But qualia can exist and be important for some purposes even if the
 language game that Wittgenstein has in mind has no need of them.
 In a comment on a version of this paper at Hilary Putnam's 80th birthday
 conference, Pierre Jacob noted, correctly I think, that belief contents do not
 mirror intentional contents of perception in the sense in which I am using the
 term. If our putative inverted twins both see a ripe tomato and have intentional
 color contents representing it as red (and the same shade of red) but have
 different qualitative contents, we would be reluctant to say that they have exactly
 the same color-relevant beliefs about the tomato. For the twins have different
 qualitative beliefs about the color of the tomato, where a qualitative belief is a
 belief that includes a color quale (or, alternatively, a belief that represents the
 tomato as having a certain phenomenal property in Shoemaker's sense of the
 term). Another way of seeing Jacob's point would be to think of the intentional
 contents of perception as individuated both in terms of reference and mode of
 presentation, where qualia are taken as modes of presentation of those referential
 contents as

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 suggested by Tyler B?rge (2003). Nothing hangs on how we use the
 term 'intentional content' (and I will continue to use the term to mean color
 representing purely referential content). The important point is that if normal
 people can be inverted with respect to one another, there is an aspect of color
 experience that cannot be captured in ordinary language in terms of properties
 of objects.
 The Normality Principle links public language color terminology to inten
 tional rather than qualitative contents of experience. I now turn to the argument
 for that link, and then to arguments for shifted and inverted spectra.
 6. Color Terms Express Intentional not Qualitative Contents
 Assuming without argument at this point that the dangerous scenario is
 possible, what exactly is the argument that color terminology ('red', 'green',
 etc.) is keyed to color-representing intentional contents rather than qualitative
 contents?
 In daily life, we do not distinguish between intentional and qualitative
 content, just as we do not normally distinguish between weight and mass or
 between rest mass and relativistic mass. Shouldn't we suppose that there is some
 sort of indeterminacy, as with 'mass', where ordinary uses of the term 'mass'
 partially denote both, as argued plausibly by Hartry Field (Field, 1973)? In
 (Block, 1990), I argued that if spectrum inversion is known to be rife, it would
 make sense to think of our tacit semantic policy as one of using color terms as
 applied to experience to denote intentional contents of experience, since when
 we say of someone that the fire hydrant looks red to him, we often know what
 the intentional content is, but not what the qualitative content is. So how can
 we be understood as attributing a qualitative content? However, we do not know
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 86 / Ned Block
 whether spectrum inversion is actually rife (cf. (Byrne, 2006), ?3.8). Is there an
 argument from our lack of knowledge whether or not inversion is rife to the
 same conclusion?
 Yes, a similar argument applies. When we say of someone that the fire
 hydrant looks red to him, we can know what the intentional content is?say if
 we know that conditions are normal and the perceiver's visual system is normal
 (excluding crossed wires)?but not, without examining the subject's brain, what
 the qualitative content is. If phrases like "looking red" were intended to apply
 to qualitative contents, we would have a vulnerability to widespread error that
 we tacitly assume that we do not have. For example, we assume that we all stop
 at stop-lights in part because they look red to us, and no one would take that
 assumption to be overturned by finding out that everyone has a slightly different
 spectrum. Of course if everyone has the same spectrum except for a few defectives
 who see red things as green, we do think that stoplights do not look red to the
 defectives. My point rather is that if spectra vary from normal person to normal
 person, we would not take that to impugn our judgment that stoplights look red.
 And the fact that we do not know whether this is true (and that there is some
 evidence that it is true) shows that a reasonable semantic view would hold that
 looking red is not a qualitative content.
 I have some agreement with Frege when he says "Often, therefore, a colour

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 word does not signify our subjective sensation, which we cannot know to agree
 with anyone else's." I would take the "cannot know" to mean in practice rather
 than in principle, since I think perceptual neuroscience is making great strides
 in that direction. The Fregean point is very easily available to language users. I
 became aware of it as a child. And my seven-year old daughter commented on
 first hearing the inverted spectrum hypothesis that it explained why some people
 didn't have purple as their favorite color.19
 7. Shifted Spectra
 The paper now shifts gears to two arguments for the possibility of spectra
 that are inverted or shifted. I have not said what sense of 'possible' is at issue.
 The relevant notion, I think, is metaphysical possibility, but there is no need to
 go into the matter because I will be arguing for a stronger thesis. In the case of
 shifted spectra, my conclusion will be that there is reason to think they are actual
 and in the case of inverted spectra I will be arguing for nomological possibility
 with an eye to actuality.
 Thus far, I have argued that we do not take our attributions of looking
 red to be shown false or otherwise problematic by the discovery of qualia, thus
 indicating that our tacit semantic policy is to key "looking red" to intentional
 contents rather than qualitative contents. But I have not yet argued that there
 really are states with qualitative contents, that is I have not argued for qualia. In
 this section I argue that individual variation in the phenomenology of color vision
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 87
 at least sometimes goes beyond variation in the use of public color terminology.
 I argue that this fact can be used to argue for the existence of qualia and further
 that its appreciation by us provides further support for the claim of the last
 section that attribution of looking red is keyed to intentional contents rather
 than qualia. (See (Block, 1990, 1999) and Putnam's example of the Ixxzians
 (Putnam, 1999, p. 162-166)).
 The first premise in the argument is the fact that there is enormous
 variation in the physiology of color vision in the normal population which leads
 to enormous variation in color phenomenology. For example, there are large
 differences among normal perceivers in peak sensitivity of cones in the retina.
 For example, there is a 51.5%/48.5% split in the population of two types of long
 wave cones that differ by 5-7 nm, roughly 24% of the difference between the
 peak sensitivities of long and middle wave cones. ((Neitz & Neitz, 1998)) This
 characteristic is sex-linked. The distribution just mentioned is for men. Women
 have smaller numbers in the two extreme categories and a much larger number
 in between. As a result, the match on a common test "most frequently made by
 female subjects occurs where no male matches" ((Neitz & Jacobs, 1986), p. 625).
 (See Block (1999) for further explanation.)
 Further, variation in peak sensitivities of cones is just one kind of color vision
 variation. In addition, the shape of the sensitivity curves vary. These differences
 are due to differences in macular pigmentation, which vary with "both age and
 degree of skin pigmentation" (Neitz & Jacobs, 1986, p. 624). Hence races that
 differ in skin pigmentation will differ in macular pig

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

mentation. There is also
 considerable variation in amount of light absorption by pre-retinal structures.
 And this factor also varies with age.
 I emphasize gender, race and age to stifle the reaction that one group should
 be regarded as normal and the others as defective.
 Premise 1 said that that there is enormous variation in the physiology of
 color vision in the normal population which leads to enormous variation in
 color phenomenology. Premise 2 says that the variation in the phenomenology
 of color vision must vary even among those whose use of color terms is the same.
 For the borders for our application of color terminology to objects must to some
 extent be constrained by needs of communicating and cooperating with other
 people.
 Imagine, contrary to fact, that we were all given rigorous training in
 the application of accepted color terminology to the point where variation in
 application of color terms among us was minor. Things we almost all categorize
 as 'borderline between red and purple' will still look quite different to us, just as,
 in the inverted spectrum scenario, a fire hydrant that the members of the inverted
 pair both categorize as 'red' looks different them. My premise 2 is that to some
 extent, that is the way things are. That is, color terminology is to some extent
 subject to social and linguistic constraint.
 How do we know that? Normal people see colors as having the same
 similarity relations. In the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue test, subjects are asked
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 88 / Ned Block
 to arrange 100 chips in a circle with one chip fixed as the starting chip. Normal
 subjects make nearly the same arrangement (Hilbert & Kalderon, 2000). One of
 the things social and linguistic influence does is to impose a set of categories on
 that similarity space. Before the introduction of oranges into England, the color
 we call 'orange' was considered a shade of 'red'. (The OED's first listed use of
 'orange' as the name of a color is from 1512.) Cultural and linguistic influences
 no doubt affect the borders of our color categorizations. And of course culture
 also affects our shade categories. I am sure that those who were school age in the
 USA after 1949 will agree pretty much on the forty shades of Crayolas introduced
 then and in use (with more added and a few subtracted in 1958, 1972, 1990, 1993
 and 1998) since then, such as turquoise blue?despite variation in the way those
 colors look to us.
 The upshot is that there are likely to be many normal cases of same use
 of public color terminology, different phenomenology?and that is what I am
 calling shifted spectra. If red things look slightly different to you than to me,
 there is no saying that either of us perceives more veridically than the other, since
 we are both normal perceivers, and so there is no way of capturing the difference
 in external terms. (A number of replies are canvassed in my (2003).) So there are
 qualia.
 An objection to this line of reasoning: Red things may look slightly different
 to you than me, but that difference may be describable in ordinary language. For
 example, a red thing may look yellower to you than to me. Here is an argument
 to support the objector. Many people report slightly different color vision in
 their two eyes, e.g. things look yellower through on

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

e eye than the other. (Hilary
 Putnam mentioned that he sees colors differently in different eyes at the Putnam
 at 80 conference mentioned in footnote 1.) Suppose one of Putnam's two eyes
 could be copied and inserted in an eyeless person, Oscar, while the other was
 inserted in another eyeless person, Elmer. If Putnam sees yellower through the
 eye that Oscar got, we have reason to think that Oscar sees yellower than Elmer.
 So here is a difference that is effable.
 Suppose Oscar and Elmer are looking at a wall painted an orange that is
 perfectly balanced between yellow and red. One possibility is that Elmer says it
 is pure orange but Oscar says the wall is slightly on the yellowish side of orange.
 However, another possibility?and one that my argument of this section militates
 towards as a reality and not just a possibility?is that both Oscar and Elmer say
 and think that the wall is pure orange. One would expect that if both had been
 trained on Crayolas! And there is no reason to suppose that they way it looks to
 them deviates systematically from their thought and talk. The situation is then
 that they both see it as pure orange but one sees it as yellower than the other.
 The best way to understand how that could be is to acknowledge that there are
 ways of seeing orange and that those ways can differ from person to person.
 The objection that we are considering notes that we can compare these ways in
 ordinary language. And here is the reply: yes we can compare them in ordinary
 language, but that does not show that we can fully capture these contents in
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 89
 ordinary language. Oscar and Elmer differ in their color vision, but they may
 have equal claim to see orange as orange.
 Points similar to the ones mentioned here were made in Block (2003) where
 I was arguing (as against representationism) that the phenomenal character of
 experience outruns its representational content. I claimed that two phenomenally
 slightly different experiences could nonetheless represent the same color (in
 different phenomenal ways), even the same minimal shade. Much of that paper
 was concerned with the issue of whether the phenomenally different experiences
 that represented the same color could nonetheless be said to have different
 representational contents. However, the point argued for in this paper is weaker as
 can be seen by noting that even if the slightly phenomenally different experiences
 are also different in representational content, they are still qualia if those
 representational contents cannot be expressed in public language. That is, even
 if my argument against representationism fails, the argument for qualia in the
 present sense might succeed.
 The picture that emerges is that there is a structured space of color qualia
 that determines the structure of real world colors themselves. Normal people
 have pretty much the same similarity relations in their structured spaces (as
 shown by the experiment with the 100 hue test mentioned earlier) but differ in
 correspondences between that space and colors in the world, probably because of
 variation in the retina and in pre-retinal structures. Relations among color qualia
 are determined by the shared structured qualia space, and so those relations can
 be expressed in terms of

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 the colors themselves (e.g. "yellower") but there is
 no objective "location" of color qualia in real world color space because of
 the differences among people in correspondence between the space and actual
 colors.20
 The point about qualia being comparable but not expressible in ordinary
 language applies also to inverted spectra. In the Oscar/Elmer shifted spectrum
 case, Oscar and Elmer differ by a rotation of the color circle?slightly towards
 yellow in Oscar. In the usual ROYGBIV depiction of the color circle, that
 corresponds to a clockwise rotation. In the inverted spectrum cases to be
 discussed below, one twin differs from the other by a 180? rotation, which is
 the same in both directions.
 These points will be the basis of my discussion below in Section 12 of the
 "Frege-Schlick" view.
 To summarize: the Putnam two eye example suggests that qualia can at least
 sometimes be compared across people. One person's color experience is yellower
 than another's or one person's color experience is "complementary" to another's.
 Does this show that the contents are expressible in public language after all and
 so are not qualia? No: qualia can be compared in public language without being
 fully capturable in public language. Even if your experience is yellower than
 mine, it can nonetheless be the case that there is no color term F such that your
 experience of red things is describable as "looks F".
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 90 / Ned Block
 8. Behavioral Indistinguishability
 My arguments for qualia on the basis of the shifted and inverted spectrum
 do not presuppose that the shifted or inverted perceivers are behaviorally
 indistinguishable from one another. For example, the 51.5%/48.5% split in the
 population that I mentioned could, for all I know, determine the extent to which
 warm colors advance or are exciting compared to cool colors. If half of mankind
 is inverted with respect to the other half, the inversion shows the existence of
 qualia even if the inverted spectrum is behaviorally detectable?unless one half
 is thereby seen to be abnormal or unless the behavioral difference undermines
 the claim of inversion. To see this, note that the little dialectic I rehearsed earlier
 about who has authority over the word 'red' would apply to the two normal
 groups as well as to two normal individuals. Neither group could pretend to be
 "the" group for which red things look red. If it is alleged that for members of one
 group, red things look green, the other group can complain that the situation
 is relevantly symmetrical, whether or not there are differences in which colors
 advance and which recede.
 Virtually all arguments that inverted spectra are impossible that I have
 read or heard appeals to one or another sort of asymmetry in color space.21
 (I am talking about arguments that spectrum inversion is impossible not that
 it makes no sense or is otherwise problematic as alleged in the arguments by
 Robert Stalnaker that will be considered later.) For example, Bernard Harrison
 (Harrison, 1973) argues that there are more colors between red and green going
 one way around the color circle (via blue) than going the other way (via yellow).
 A far more significant asymmetry is that the most saturated colors differ in
 their lightness levels from color to color. If you decrease

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 the lightness of a
 sample of yellow you get a different color (brown), but the same is not true
 for green or blue. The most saturated reds are darker than for other primary
 colors. Further, desaturated red is pink but desaturated green is green, so hue
 is not symmetrical with regard to saturation.22 These are not just differences
 in categorization, but also differences in similarity. A light and dark blue look
 much more similar to one another than do light yellow and dark yellow, i.e.
 brown (Hubert & Kalderon, 2000). Just how significant such asymmetries are is
 hotly debated. Stephen Palmer (1999) discusses a far larger number of ways in
 which the color space can be mapped onto itself than had appeared in the prior
 literature, some of which may avoid such problems although Justin Broackes
 (2007) argues otherwise. In addition, as Shoemaker notes, it is not clear why
 minor asymmetries ought to be significant given that we could imagine a slight
 variant of human color vision in which those asymmetries are absent but color
 experience is much the same as ours. But this argument is unsound according to
 Daniel Dennett (1991). Dennett notes that red is advancing, warm and exciting,
 whereas green is receding, cool and calming, claiming that such asymmetries in
 function are what make the colors look different from one another. So, according
 to Dennett, Shoemaker's imagined race for whom these "minor" asymmetries
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 91
 are ironed out, could not have color experience much like ours. Others (Block,
 1994) argue that these differences in reaction may not be intrinsic to color
 experience, their widespread presence in different cultures being explained by
 environmental regularities that are not necessary at least to the basics of color
 experience.23
 But this whole set of controversies can be sidestepped?at least if the
 existence of qualia is the issue. For as I have noted, the argument for qualia that
 I am talking about depends not whether the inversion or shift is behaviorally
 ind?tectable but whether the groups that are inverted or shifted with respect
 to others are normal. If it turns out?and as I argued, the evidence points in
 that direction?that a person's spectrum is very often shifted with respect to his
 neighbor, I don't think anyone would conclude that this shows that defective
 color vision is widespread.
 In the rest of this paper, I will discuss an argument that an inverted spectrum
 is possible. I will focus on an intrasubjective inverted spectrum because of the
 advantage I mentioned earlier. I will be considering an inversion in which the
 inverted pair are roughly functionally equivalent but not necessarily exactly
 functionally equivalent. For example, perhaps one member of the pair experiences
 red things as exciting and advancing whereas the other experiences them as
 calming and receding. (Earlier versions are in (Block, 1990, 1994).)
 I say that an argument that an inverted spectrum is possible is an argument
 for qualia. "But doesn't a possible inverted spectrum show at most that qualia
 are possible rather than actual?" The argument from the possibility of inverted
 spectra to qualia is this. Suppose an inverted spectrum is possible but non
 actual. If we manage to create an inverted spectrum (a proce

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)


 How do we know that the colors have not reinverted so that the way things
 look is the same at Stage 1? According to the story?which I am claiming is
 a genuine possibility?you remember very clearly what things used to look like
 before the operation, and if asked by close relations in private, you say that
 everything used to look the complementary color of the way it looks now. At
 Stage 3, you are 50, and you haven't thought about your operation in many years.
 Someone who recognizes you despite the cosmetic surgery says to you "Aren't
 you the person who underwent the experimental spectrum inversion?" You say
 "Oh yes, I haven't thought about that in many years. But I do clearly recall the
 look of the ripe tomatoes at my 18th birthday party. They looked to me then the
 way grass looks to me now, colorwise." If asked to paint a picture of the way
 things look to you today, you paint the grass green and the sky blue. If asked to
 paint a picture of the way things looked to you before the operation thirty-two
 years earlier, you paint the grass red and the sky yellow (Taylor, 1966). Another
 10 years pass, during which time no one asks you about the operation and during
 which time you don't think of the days before 18 or any of the times someone
 has questioned you about the inversion. At age 60, you develop amnesia for the
 period up to age 50 (cf. (Putnam, 1981)). Now, and this is Stage 4, you have no
 memories for the period before your operation, nor do you have any memories
 for episodes of remembering that period. However, according to the story, the
 way red things look to you at Stage 4 is the way green things looked to you at
 Stage 1. If this is to be an argument against functionalism, Stage 1 and Stage 4
 have to be functionally equivalent.25 However, if the purpose of the argument is
 to demonstrate qualia?and that is my main purpose here?the differences could
 be more substantial. For example, perhaps at Stage 4, red is no more exciting
 than green.
 The way in which this argument is question-begging is summarized in
 Figure 1. The subject at Stage 3 says "I do recall the look of the ripe tomatoes at
 my 18th birthday party. They looked to me then the way grass looks to me now,
 colorwise." But what are these ways and why should we countenance them? And
 if these suspicious ways are coming in at Stage 3, presumably they must have
 been involved at the outset, in the argument at Stage 1. The relevant bones of
 the argument diagrammed in Figure 1 amounts to this:
 Stage 1: There is a way red things look to the subject, R.
 Stage 2: The way red things look to the subject is now G.
 Stage 3: The way red things look to the subject remains G.
 Stage 4: The way red things look to the subject remains G, even though the
 function of G is similar to (but not necessarily exactly the same
 as) the function of R in Stage 1. The subject at Stage 4 is a normal
 perceiver.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 94 / Ned Block
 The question-begging aspect is the postulation and naming of the ways
 things look, even at Stage 1.
 However, ways need not be brought in at the outset. It may seem that
 in saying that red things look red, I have sneaked in something illicit maybe
 something amounting to ways, for we would not ordinarily say that red things
 look red. Isn't that "language going on holiday

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)



peration can?and often does if successful?restore normality. A hernia is
 stitched up, a tumor removed, a heart repaired?all cases in which the "after" is
 more normal than the "before". If we were to discover that all the rest of us were
 born with the physiological formation of the visual system that obtains in Stage
 4 and that it is Stage 1 that is "peculiar", we would regard Stage 1 as "crossed".
 If we were to find out that our subject at Stage 1 was born with an unusual
 visual system, we would naturally take the view that the operation "uncrossed"
 the wires in his visual system, making his visual system normal again. This way
 of talking makes it look as if the "crossed" visual system must be abnormal, but
 that is a mistake.
 For what would we say if half the population has a visual system like Stage
 1 and half like Stage 4? Then we should say that both are normal, that there are
 two different varieties of normal visual systems. And in that case, both Stage 1
 and Stage 4 are normal. The operation has succeeded in changing one normal
 visual system into another normal visual system. If Stage 1 and 4 are both
 normal?and possible?there are qualia, since neither our subject at Stage 1 nor
 our subject at Stage 4 can claim that he uniquely, sees red things as red and green
 things as green.
 I think the fact that "crossed" visual systems are normal can be shown
 by example. The example I have in mind was first advanced by Martine Nida
 R?melin for a somewhat different purpose, as I will now explain. (See (Byrne,
 2006; Byrne & Hubert, 2003; Nida-R?melin, 1996).) The three kinds of cones
 in the retina feed to three "opponent-process channels", as discovered in the
 19th Century by Hering, on the basis of purely behavioral data. The red/green
 channel operates as follows: If the activation of the R cones is greater than that
 of the G cones, the red/green channel is excited and the subject sees red (if the
 other channels are in approximate equilibrium). If the activation of the G cones
 is greater than the R cones, the red/green channel is inhibited and the subject
 sees green if the other channels are in approximate equilibrium. The three types
 of cones send both excitatory and inhibitory signals to three kinds of cells in
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 98 / Ned Block
 the structure that is the basis of the next stage of processing beyond the retina
 (known as the lateral geniculate nucleus). These cells are called "color opponent
 cells" for obvious reasons.
 One form of color blindness occurs when the subject has a genetic defect that
 substitutes the photo-pigment in the G cones, chlorolabe, for the photo-pigment
 in the R cones, erythrolabe. With the photo-pigments in the two kinds of cones
 the same?both chlorolabe?the subject is red/green color blind. It can also
 happen that another genetic defect substitutes the photo-pigment in the R cones
 for the photo-pigment in the G cones. In this case, they are both erythrolabe.
 (See Byrne and Hubert, 2003.) Again, with the photo-pigments in the two cones
 the same, the subject is red/green color blind. If the two genetic defects occur at
 once, the subject has the usual G photo-pigment in the R cones and the usual R
 photo-pigment in the G cones, resulting in normal discrimination. This case?
 known as pseudo-normal color vision?

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

can be predicted to occur in 14 of 10,000
 males, but as far as I know, no such case has ever been noticed. Apparently, the
 color vision of these people is sufficiently normal so that they do not consult an
 eye doctor about abnormal color vision.
 If the eyes and optic nerves from a pseudo-normal were switched with yours
 (assuming you are not pseudo-normal), the effect would be?as far as we know?
 that the red/green opponent cells would be activated in the opposite manner from
 those in your retina. Red things would look green and green things would look
 red. The point is that the pseudo-normal is a living example of crossed wires
 in the visual system.27 What we do not know is whether the development and
 history of visual experiences of the pseudo-normal yields something different
 from the imagined transplant. That is, what is controversial is how hard-wired
 the connection is between the cones and the color-opponent cells and between
 the color-opponent cells and the rest of the visual system in the brain. If those
 connections are hard-wired, then we can expect that in pseudo-normals, the
 red/green channel would be inhibited in input situations in which it is excited
 in normals and excited when it is inhibited in normals. Then these subjects are
 red/green inverted with respect to normals such as you and me.
 (Byrne & Hilbert, 2003, p. 19) give 3 arguments against Nida R?melin.
 "First, even if pseudo-normal vision actually occurs, its frequency will be very
 low ...; thus the possibility of pseudo-normal vision does not show that spectrum
 inversion might be widespread. Second, there is in any case no reason to suppose
 that pseudo-normal genes would preserve normal visual pathways: the opponent
 channels might be switched as well, in which case pseudo-normal subjects would
 not be red-green spectrally inverted. Third, there is evidence that for the M- and
 L-cones the development of the retinal circuitry for the red-green opponent
 channel is insensitive to which pigment the cone contains. In other words,
 pseudo-normal subjects would just be normal subjects." The first point is
 irrelevant to the issue considered here, where normality rather than frequency is
 what is in question. On the second point: I think it would be rational to accept
 even odds on the experiential inversion of the pseudo-normal subjects and that
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 99
 is enough for the claim that inversion may be actual and at any rate is possible so
 far as we know. The third point seems to me to count in the opposite direction
 of what Byrne and Hubert say. If the development of the visual system did react
 differently depending on whether the pigment was erythrolabe or chlorolabe,
 then that would count against the possibility that the cones are hard-wired into
 the opponent-process channels. The force of the pseudo-normal configuration
 depends on pigment-insensitive connections between cones and channels.
 Nida-R?melin and others (Block, 1999; Nida-R?melin, 1996, 1999a, 1999b;
 Ross, 1999) have used this case in an argument for the possibility of intersub
 jective inversion. I agree with that argument, but I am using pseudo-normals
 for a less controversial purpose: as an example of crossed wires in the visual
 system, and crossed wires that are normal. It is a

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

case of crossed wires because if
 a pseudo-normal's eyes were switched with yours, you (and the pseudo-normal)
 would experience color inversion as in Wittgenstein's original case of the person
 who wakes up one morning finding that red things look green and conversely.
 Pseudo-normals who live with their eyes from birth (and before) might not be
 inverted with respect to the majority, but if their eyes are switched with yours,
 the effect will be to stimulate the R-G channel in the opposite from normal way.
 So pseudo-normals have crossed wires. But are they normal? How can that
 be when pseudo-normal color vision is the combination of two genetic defects.
 Chlorolabe and erythrolabe must be more or less equally suited to the two kinds
 of cones as attested by the fact that none of the more than 4 million pseudo
 normals in the world have come to light?as far as I have been able to determine.
 A pseudo-normal person can equally say that normals are the result of two
 genetic defects: the cases are symmetrical. Pseudo-normals are less frequent, but
 I hope no one will take that to be decisive. If pseudo-normals were the more
 numerous, no doubt they would be in control of the terminology.
 The example of pseudo-normals shows I think that in ter subjective inversion
 may be actual and is for all we know possible. But that is not my main point
 in introducing it. Recall that we are discussing intrasubjective inversion and the
 issue at hand is whether the visual apparatus of Stage 4 should be regarded as
 abnormal solely on the ground of difference from Stage 1. I offer the case of
 pseudo-normals as normal visual systems that differ in a way that could be like
 the difference that I am hypothesizing exists between Stages 1 and 4, namely
 "crossed".
 The argument for qualia is supposed to be mainly based on the possibility of
 an intrasubjective inverted spectrum. I did detour through the pseudo-normals
 as an example of intersubjective inversion but also as an example of a kind of
 "crossed" visual system that is normal. And the argument can make do with
 the latter. I talked about others who have visual systems like that in Stage 1
 and others who have visual systems like that in Stage 4, but without appealing
 to intersubjective inverted spectrum. The point is that there is no reason why
 both visual systems cannot be normal and so no reason why our intra-subjective
 inversion subject has to be abnormal at either the beginning or end of the process.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 100 / Ned Block
 Sydney Shoemaker and Daniel Taylor (Shoemaker, 1975; Shoemaker, 1982,
 1996a; Taylor, 1966) have argued from the possibility of intrasubjective inversion
 to the possibility of intersubjective inversion. They argue that if Fred undergoes
 intrasubjective spectrum inversion, then the color experience of others must
 be radically different from Fred's either before his inversion or after it (or
 both). My argument is different since my argument does not appeal essentially
 to intersubjective inversion. An opponent of the Shoemaker-Taylor intra/inter
 argument28 might acknowledge that crossed wires in the visual system makes
 for color inversion in the intra-subjective case?as is shown by the testimony of
 subjects who undergo the procedure?while resisting the claim as applied to the
 intersubjective

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 case. The idea would be that congenital differences of that sort
 between different groups of normal perceivers are just alternative realizations
 of the same phenomenology of experience. I think that this refusal to accept
 inter subjective inversion can be defeated on its own terms, but that is not my
 main purpose here.
 Objection: "Although the result of the operation is a normal visual system,
 our subject at Stage 4 is abnormal because of the operation which produced it."
 Not so, because an operation need not produce anything abnormal. An operation
 can correct an abnormal defect, yielding normality.
 "But the process leading to Stage 4 includes both the operation and the
 adaptation, and doesn't that make Stage 4 abnormal?" No: adaptation to an
 operation is often an essential part of the normalizing process. For example,
 there is a congenital "heart inversion" condition called transposition of the great
 arteries in which the outputs from the ventricles are reversed. In the normal
 heart, the pulmonary artery rises from the right ventricle, taking deoxygenated
 "blue" blood to the lungs (which is then returned to the left side of the heart via
 pulmonary veins), whereas the aorta rises from the left ventricle pumping "red"
 blood to oxygenate the body. In the heart inversion condition, the aorta rises from
 the right ventricle, pumping "blue" blood to the body, whereas the pulmonary
 artery arises from the left ventricle, circulating "red" blood unnecessarily to the
 lungs. The effect is that the left ventricle does very little work, quickly losing
 muscle mass as a result. If an arterial switch operation is done too late (more
 than about a month after birth), the left ventricle will fail and the child will
 die, but if the operation is done early enough, the left ventricle can build up
 mass after the operation via the process of making new heart cells, an ability
 that the heart loses. The point is that the operation does not immediately restore
 normality. First, there is a period of adaptation in which the left ventricle regains
 the lost cells. But the need for a period of adaptation after the arterial switch
 operation does not make the child's heart forever abnormal.29
 11. Memory
 Wittgenstein raised the question of how we could distinguish inversion
 from misremembering, raising the issue of "whether the things stored up may
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 101
 not constantly change their nature" (Wittgenstein, 1993, p. 204). And Dennett
 (1988; 1991) has emphasized the issue of the unreliability of memory in arguing
 against inversion scenarios. Figure 4 shows a schematized Stage 1 at the top
 (that is the topmost of the 4 schematic depictions). Seeing a ripe tomato causes
 the subject to experience red which causes him to say "Red!", indicating a
 normally functioning experience as of red. I symbolize a normal experience
 of red with 'R' as in Figure 1. I am assuming, contrary to the intervening
 argument, and purely for mnemonic purposes, that the inverted subject can be
 seen as abnormal with an experience symbolized with 'G'. (Less mnemonic
 symbols that don't make this mistake would be 'X' and 'Y'.) The second
 portion shows the subject at Stage 2 where seeing the red tomato causes an
 experience as of green, which causes the subject to sa

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

y "Green!", indicating the
 complementary function. The bottom half of the diagram indicates two different
 versions of the situation at Stages 3 and 4. According to the possibility that I
 have been emphasizing ("phenomenal realism"), at Stages 3 and 4, red things
 look green. The subject says "Red!" because there has been a terminological
 inversion that cancels out the color perception inversion. But memory skeptics
 such as Dennett wonder how we can rule out the case schematized in the last
 line in which the compensating inversion occurs earlier than I imagined and the
 subject misreports his experience, remembering falsely what red used to look
 like.
 Dennett's claim is that the two possibilities represented in the two scenarios
 at the bottom half of Figure 3 cannot be distinguished. However, he gives
 no reason to doubt that they can be distinguished empirically, as indicated in
 Figure 5.
 Figure 5 presents an implementation of the difference indicated in the bottom
 two scenarios of Figure 4. In the top case in Figure 5, the possibility that I have
 been emphasizing is elaborated. The subject at Stage 3 sees a ripe tomato and
 contrasts the way it looks colorwise with the way ripe tomatoes used to look.
 The machinery of this comparison involves a comparator device which compares
 the neural implementation of the experience with the neural implementation of
 the memory of previous tomato experiences. Of course, this story is physicalistic,
 but no more so I think than the Tuesday New York Times (see footnote 13). A
 Wittgensteinian who wishes to deny this level of physicalism would have to adopt
 a revisionary theoretical perspective, something that a Wittgensteinian should not
 do. The skeptical idea is that the memory is itself inverted, as is the experience,
 so when the subject compares them, the subject says the current experience is not
 what he remembers. The report is the same but the internal reality is not. Dennett
 wonders how these two hypotheses could possibly be distinguished. Since they
 cannot be distinguished, he thinks there is no real difference. (He is explicit
 about advocating "first person verificationism".) My response is that there is no
 reason to doubt that the normal methods of science could distinguish them. For
 example, perhaps it could be shown that the memory representation does not
 change in the relevant period. Dennett might object that one can tell whether
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 102 / Ned Block
 ?k %??^
 -<@> Stage
 "Greetf) stage 2
 ?^Jtn Stage 3 and 4 according to
 phenomenal realist
 J?? t$?^
 Stage Stage 3 and 4
 according to memory skeptic
 Figure 4. The phenomenal realist contrasted with the memory skeptic. See text.
 the memory representation in the brain changes only if one can distinguish the
 memory representation from the physical basis of the quale itself, whereas his
 point is that these cannot be distinguished. But since memory and experience
 are to some extent distinct, they must to some extent be distinct at the level of
 the brain. The point of the detail illustrated in Figure 5 is that once one makes
 the hypothesis concrete, the claim that the normal methods of science cannot
 possibly resolve such issues begins to look like mere skepticism.
 The point is further illustrated by a different form of the skeptical hypo

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)


2006 discussions of the issue
 reject it.30 Stalnaker's version of the Frege-Schlick view is in a way much less
 radical because what his version rejects "is only a notion of qualia that is both
 independent of representational content, and also comparable across persons."
 (2006, p. 391) He is happy to acknowledge interpersonal qualitative comparisons
 so long as they can be cashed out in representational/functional terms. In a way
 though, Stalnaker's version is more radical than Shoemaker's since he rejects
 intra-personal comparisons of experience over time as well as inter-personal
 comparisons of experience?if the qualities of the experience cannot be cashed
 out representationally/functionally
 I said that skepticism about interpersonal comparisons of experience is
 incompatible with a generally physicalistic world view. To see this, suppose there
 are two people who are physical (and functional) duplicates looking at the same
 object, say the moon, from the same visual angle. Suppose also that they are
 identical in history of stimulation. Despite identity in everything about them and
 their environment, current and historical, that could reasonably be supposed to
 be relevant, the form of skepticism under discussion insists that there is still no
 issue of fact as to whether their experiences of the moon are the same or totally
 different.
 Hilary Putnam argued in response to a presentation of this paper at the
 Putnam at 80 conference (see footnote 1) that a single sufficient condition?
 perfect physical identity?does not establish a matter of fact for any other case
 or give us any reason to think there is any kind of a physically determined
 metric of similarity. Right, but there is no reason to doubt that normal
 procedures could not discover the determinants of many comparisons between
 people.
 As I mentioned earlier, Putnam himself has slightly different color vision in
 his two eyes. Consider Oscar and Elmer mentioned earlier, one of whom has a
 copy of Putnam's left eye, the other of whom has a copy of Putnam's right eye.
 If Putnam sees things grayer through the left eye (as he does), we have every
 reason to think that Oscar will see things grayer than Elmer, especially if we can
 pinpoint whatever it is about the retina or pre-retinal structures in Putnam's two
 eyes that very likely are responsible for the difference. Further, examination of
 your eyes and mine could provide evidence that other things equal, your color
 vision is grayer than mine. One can imagine many cases in which one would be
 reasonably confident about a comparison between people, independently of any
 representational or functional theory or any other philosophical theory of the
 nature of experience. In short, we have mundane reason to believe certain inter
 personal comparisons of experience. Wholesale rejection of interpersonal com
 parisons is incompatible with scientifically informed common sense. Stalnaker's
 view conjoined with this fact entails that some sort of representationism is true.
 The possibility of an inverted spectrum is incompatible with leading versions
 of representationism, so not surprisingly, Stalnaker argues against the inverted
 spectrum.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 105
 Memory: R^>
 "Looks different from
 before I had the
 operation."
 "Look

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

s different from
 before I had the
 operation/
 Memory: R
 Figure 6. The top figure is the same as in Figure 5. The bottom figure illustrates a different
 sort of memory skeptic.
 Stalnaker's argument is based in large part on two analogies, of which I will
 discuss only one. It depends on a relational theory of space. Consider an analog
 of an inverted spectrum for space. We can make sense of the idea that this table
 is moved 3 feet in the direction defined by the arrow from here towards say the
 Andromeda Nebula. And that this chair is also moved in that direction. But
 if everything moved in that direction, would the result be a universe in which
 everything has moved 3 feet from where those things are now? Of course not.
 What it is for something to move 3 feet in that direction is for it to move 3
 feet relative to everything else. If object A moves 3 feet to the left, then when
 object B moves 3 feet to the left the "everything else" is slightly different from
 what it was in the case of A's move, so in the end the relations that define
 position are the same as when we started. The suggestion is that in the intra
 subjective inverted spectrum scenario, there is similarly no fact of change except
 relative to other color experiences. If they all shift, then there is no change at
 all.
 If one does not believe that the qualitative character of experience is entirely
 determined by relations to other qualitative characters of other experiences, then
 the analogy will look wrong. The analogy is certainly at variance with some
 aspects of common sense. For example, I think common sense leaves it open
 whether a color blind person can have exactly the same experience of say a
 black and white drawing as non-color blind people have, despite the fact that the
 color-blind person's "color space" is different. But the most important point is
 that this is not an issue to be settled a priori or by common sense. The nature
 of experience?and I would say the same of the nature of space?is to be settled
 by the best scientific picture.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 106 / Ned Block
 Shoemaker (2006) makes another point about the analogy. On the relational
 theory of space that Shoemaker attributes to Stalnaker, diachronic distance is
 dependent on synchronie distance. Something at t2 has moved from where it was
 at 11 if its synchronie distances from other things are systematically different in
 the appropriate ways at t2 from its synchronie distances from those things at
 ti. But there is no comparable dependence of diachronic qualitative relations
 on synchronie ones. Shoemaker's example (p. 22) is that if two colored lights
 are flashed, one after the other, I can compare the experiences of them without
 comparing either of them with the kinesthetic experiences, smells, sounds and
 aches and pains that accompanied either one of them. Some functionalists might
 suppose that there is a dependence on synchronie relations even if I don't have
 to be aware of it in order to judge the relation between the two lights, but if that
 is the objection to Shoemaker's point, then once again the defense of Stalnaker's
 analogy appeals to the conclusion.
 Stalnaker (2006) replies that the relational view of space that he defends
 is not the one that Shoemaker attributes to him. On Stalnaker's version of
 the

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 relational view of space, diachronic distance is not dependent on synchronie
 distance. Both kinds of distances are a matter of relations in a coordinate system.
 Actual objects are used to fix the reference of the coordinate system but not to
 define it in any stronger sense. On Stalnaker's version of the relational theory,
 distances are real, but locations are conventional. So, once everything has moved
 3 feet in the same direction, all relative distances are the same as at the beginning,
 and there is no overall motion with respect to any location.
 Here is a different analogy. Students of Galileo founded the Accademia del
 Cimento in Florence in the 17th Century. Members of the Accademia pioneered
 the study of heat phenomena, making the first thermometers, an example of
 which is found in Figure 7. These thermometers were marked with gradations
 visible in the picture, but the gradations were not carefully spaced and there was
 no attempt made to relate the gradations at one end of the scale to those of the
 other end or of one thermometer with those of another. At the beginning of their
 investigations, the experimenters did not know whether an intra-thermometer
 difference of 5 degrees at one end was in any objective way equivalent to an
 intra-thermometer difference of 5 degrees at the other end or whether there
 was any inter-thermometer correspondence between 5 degrees as measured by
 one thermometer and 5 degrees as measured by another. A big advance was
 made when thermometers and their scales were calibrated to specific freezing
 and boiling points such as the freezing and boiling point of water. Now there
 was a meaning to inter-thermometer comparisons, but it was still unknown
 whether an analog of Stalnaker's theory of space applied. Perhaps there were
 facts about the temperature difference between the boiling and freezing point
 of water, but no "locational" facts about either point. That is, perhaps the only
 facts of temperature were distances between certain temperature points such
 as freezing and boiling points for various substances. But as it happened, that
 turned out false when it was discovered that temperature is mean molecular
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 107
 Figure 7.
 kinetic energy and hence that there is an absolute zero point at which kinetic
 energy is zero. That is a "locational" fact that would correspond in the spatial
 arena to the discovery of a kind of "absolute" space.
 Which is the better analogy for phenomenal experience, Stalnaker's space
 analogy or the temperature analogy? I don't see how anyone could think this
 is an a priori question. There are two accounts, a functionalist account that
 roughly fits Stalnaker's view and a physicalist account that roughly fits my view
 (Block, forthcoming). I think that there is some preliminary evidence that favors
 the physicalist view?some of which I have mentioned here?but my main point
 is that there is no way to be sure now. Different philosophers come to different
 conclusions based on their philosophical perspectives and their own sense of
 their own experience.
 13. Conclusion
 I started with a shifted spectrum argument for qualia and then moved to
 an inverted spectrum argument. I provided evidence for the claim that a shifted
This content downloaded from

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 108 / Ned Block
 spectrum is actual. My argument with respect to the inverted spectrum was more
 modest: there is reason to think it is possible and perhaps actual. A key feature
 of my argument was that the versions of the shifted and inverted spectrum
 needed for qualia do not require behavioral indistinguishability of the shifted
 and inverted pairs?a point that disarms many objections. The upshot is that
 Wittgenstein is right to say "This is a very serious situation."
 Notes
 1. An ancestor of this paper was written for a conference on the work of Paul
 Horwich in Pecs, Hungary, May 15-16, 2006 and another draft was prepared
 for a conference on the work of Hilary Putnam in Dublin, Ireland, March 14
 16, 2007. I am grateful to Horwich and Putnam for their responses and to
 Pierre Jacob, the commentator on my paper at the Putnam conference for his
 comments and to the audiences there, at the University of Oslo in November,
 2006, the University of California at Santa Cruz in April, 2007 and at the Ecole
 Normale Sup?rieur in May, 2007. I am also grateful to Paul Horwich, John
 Morrison and Stephen White for comments on an earlier draft.
 2. Alex Byrne (Byrne, 2006) and Tim Crane (Crane, 2000) discuss uses of the term
 'qualia', and the term's history. According to Crane, C.S. Peirce used 'qualia' in
 something like its modern sense, and Byrne holds that C.I. Lewis introduced the
 term into contemporary philosophy.
 3. Representationism is the view that the phenomenal character of an experience
 supervenes on its "referential" representational content. The reason for the
 "referential" is to exclude unreduced phenomenal characters as modes of pre
 sentation. (The contents assumed by representationists are not object-involving.)
 In favor: (Byrne, 2001; Clark, 2000; Crane, 2001; Dretske, 1995; Harman, 1990;
 Lycan, 1996; Thau, 2002; Tye, 1995). Opposed: (Block, 2003; B?rge, 2003; Nickel,
 forthcoming). Harder to classify: (Carruthers, 2000; Chalmers, 2004; Davies,
 1997; Kriegel, 2002; Levine, 2003; Pautz, 2005; Shoemaker, 1994a).
 4. Functionalism (Armstrong, 1968; Lewis, 1970; Putnam, 1967) says that pain (for
 example) can be characterized in terms of its causal relations to sensory inputs,
 behavioral outputs and to other mental states.
 5. Useful discussions of the inverted spectrum that won't be discussed other than
 in this note are to be found in (Chalmers, 1996; Cohen, 2001; Cole, 1990; Kirk,
 1982; Lycan, 1973, 1996; Rey, 1992, 1998; Tye, 1995, 2000).
 6. Wittgenstein's notes have been re-edited by David G. Stern (Wittgenstein, 1993)
 who says that Rush Rhees left out about half the material (p. 200-201). Since
 Stern gives the reader much more information about the text, I am using his
 version. This passage appears on p. 230-231 of Stern's version and p. 284 of
 Rhees's version. The square brackets indicate changes in the text by Stern.
 The bracketed 'red' in the first line is accompanied by a footnote saying that
 the text reads 'green' but that this was probably a slip. The 3 dots at the
 end of the second paragraph are in the text and do not indicate anything
 left out by me. The '[[284]]' indicates a page number in Wittgenstein's notes
 themselves.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://ab

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

out.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 109
 7. Stern says "The text reads 'green,' but this is because Wittgenstein had changed
 an earlier use of 'green' to 'blue' but failed to make the change here" (p. 231).
 8. In his introductory notes Rhees (Rhees, 1968, p. 274) notes "All that is printed
 here is a collection of rough notes or memoranda which Wittgenstein made for
 his own use. He would never have published them?he would not even have had
 them typed?without revising and rearranging them. Certainly he would have
 revised the language."
 9. Recall that the first passage quoted above seemed to involve a shift from the
 example of red/green to red/blue inversion. I will treat the first passage as if it
 concerned red and green.
 10. This material is preceded by the following passage:
 [[316]] Privacy of sense data. I must bore you by a repetition of what I said last
 time. We said that one reason for introducing the idea of the sense datum was
 that people, as we say, sometimes see different things, colours, e.g., looking at
 the same object. Cases in which we say "he sees dark red whereas I see light
 red." We then are inclined to talk about an object other than the physical object
 which the person sees who is said to see the physical] obj[ect]. It is further clear
 that we only gather from the other person's behaviour (e.g. what he tells us) what
 that obj[ect] looks like, and so it lies near to say that he has this object before his
 mind's eye and that we don't see it. Though we can also say that we might have
 it before our mind['s] eye. The 'sense datum' here?the way the physical object
 appears to him. In other cases no physical] object enters.
 Now I must draw your attention to one particular difficulty about the use of the
 'sense datum.'" The next sentence is the first one quoted in the text to which
 this is a footnote. Note, incidentally, that qualia in the sense in which I am using
 the term are not supposed to be 'objects' of the sort that sense datum theorists
 talked about and that Wittgenstein seems to have in mind.
 11. Michael Tye (2002) has responded to me on this point by an account of the
 difference as one between an experience that ascribes indeterminacy and one
 that indeterminately ascribes. This distinction certainly makes sense for verbal
 representations, but bringing it in to solve this problem begs the question by
 assuming that phenomenal representations are like verbal representations in
 allowing for this kind of distinction. This issue has been discussed in varying
 forms in (Block, 1983; Dennett, 1968; Peacocke, 1993; Tye, 1995).
 12. On my view, there are two such epistemic problems. One is the "Hard Problem"
 (Chalmers, 1996): we don't understand why the neural basis of a given experience
 is the neural basis of that experience rather than another or none. The 2nd
 problem is the "harder" problem, a version of the problem of other minds. On a
 naturalistic picture of consciousness, there is no problem about the consciousness
 of other humans, but when we ask about robots that don't overlap with us in
 what we take to be the physical basis of our conscious states, there is a problem
 of how to think about the question of whether they have conscious states (Block,
 2002).
 13. More specifically, I am assuming that the phenomenal character of experience
 supervenes on physical states of the body and, in a concession that makes the
 view I am assuming a very weak f


orm of physicalism, the physical environment
 surrounding the body and even the past physical states of that environment. Of
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 110/Ned Block
 course some will balk at even such a weak form of physicalism, but it would be
 very interesting if it turned out to be incompatible with a Wittgensteinian point
 of view that supposedly prescinds from "theorizing", given that this minimal
 physicalism is deeply engrained in the day-to-day practice (and not just the
 theology) of the psychology and neuroscience of perception and in my view in
 common sense ways of thinking about perception. (See (Nida-R?melin, 1999a).)
 I don't think an approach to the mind that stresses "leaving everything as it is"
 can lightly require giving up such practices.
 14. It should also be said that although some kinds of visual experience are localized
 in the brain, notably experience as of a face or as of motion, the same cannot
 be said for color. Color appears to be represented at a number of occipital sites,
 mainly in V4 and V8.
 15. Note that it is clear from the first passage that I quoted that for the kind
 of inverted spectrum that Wittgenstein is willing to accept, he accepts both
 intrasubjective and inter subjective versions of the innocuous scenario. The
 individual he describes sees everything differently today than yesterday?that's
 the intrasubjective version. And he also endorses the inter subjective version
 in saying "I think we should under these or similar circumstances be inclined
 to say that he saw red what we saw blue." So it does not appear to be the
 intrasubjective/intersubjective difference that is at issue as between the innocuous
 and dangerous scenarios.
 16. I have emphasized the importance of normality and expressibility in ordinary
 language in arguments for qualia in "Sexism, Racism, Ageism and the Nature
 of Consciousness" (Block, 1999) in which it is argued that males and females,
 although equally normal, see colors that they classify as red slightly differently.
 Likewise for old/young and races that differ in pigmentation. (Versions of
 these arguments transformed for the somewhat different purposes of this paper
 will be briefly summarized in the section below on shifted spectra.) And, as
 mentioned earlier, Horwich (forthcoming) also argues that the difference between
 an innocuous inversion and a dangerous one is expressibility in natural language
 by normal perceivers.
 17. In Block (1990) I inadvisedly called violations of the Principle of Normality the
 fallacy of intentionalizing qualia.
 18. "Suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it a 'beetle'. No
 one can look into anyone else's box, and everyone says he knows what a beetle
 is only by looking at his beetle.?Here it would be quite possible for everyone
 to have something different in his box. One might even imagine such a thing
 constantly changing.?But suppose the word 'beetle' had a use in these people's
 language??If so it would not be used as the name of a thing. The thing in the
 box has no place in the language game at all; not even as a something: for the
 box might even be empty. No, one can 'divide through' by the thing in the box;
 it cancels out, whatever it is". (Wittgenstein, 1958, ?293).
 19. The Fregean view has some affinities with that of Paul Churchland (1

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

984, p. 40.)
 Churchland concedes the conceivability of an inverted spectrum, allowing that
 different perceivers might have qualitatively different experiences which all have
 the functional role characteristic of the experience of red. "Such intrinsic qualia
 merely serve as salient features that permit the quick introspective identification
 of sensations, as black-on-orange stripes serve as a salient feature for the quick
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia /111
 visual identification of tigers. But specific qualia are not essential to the type
 identity of mental states, any more than black-orange stripes are essential to
 the type-identity of tigers." (See also (Churchland & Churchland, 1981; Clark,
 1985).) What I don't understand about Churchland's view is how he can maintain
 functionalism despite allowing that qualia escape the functionalist net. In the end,
 I suspect that his view is really a mixed functionalist/physicalist view similar to
 that of (Shoemaker, 1982): functionalism supplies conditions of similarity and
 difference of qualia, but physicalism supplies the natures of specific qualia.
 20. One complication that I have not mentioned is that the structure of qualia space
 contains four privileged planes that correspond to the "unique" colors, e.g. reds
 that are not at all yellowish or bluish. See Pautz (2005).
 21. One argument against inverted spectra that is not based on an appeal to
 asymmetries is given in (Byrne & Hubert, 1997). However, that argument is
 directed towards the conjunction of the possibility of an inverted spectrum
 together with the thesis that there is a failure of match between the phenomenal
 character of a sensation and its intentional content. It is not an argument that
 purports to show that inverted spectra are impossible.
 22. See (Broackes, 2007; Byrne, 2006; Churchland, 2002; Harden, 1997; Hilbert &
 Kalderon, 2000) for more details. A slightly more accurate description of the
 point about red and green is that desaturated near-red is pink but a desaturated
 near green is near-green rather than green.
 23. One point on the side of an ind?tectable inverted spectrum is that the inde
 tectability can be relative to culture and environment. That is, what is required
 for an ind?tectable inverted spectrum is that there is an environment?including
 cultural environment?in which there are two individuals (or stages of a single
 individual) for whom there is no possibility of detecting an inversion. If those two
 subjects are indetectably inverted with respect to one another, then they cannot
 express the difference in natural language, even if in a different environment and
 culture they would have been detectably inverted. For example, consider a people
 who live underground in circumstances of little light, never seeing the sky and
 in which there are few stable colors?other than black and white. We would also
 have to imagine that the culture has a prohibition against seeing the unclothed
 human body, one's own or that of others. The point is that the environment can
 be restricted in ways that restrict the application of color asymmetries that would
 show up in less restricted circumstances.
 24. I speak as if there is a single kind of inversion but actually there are many
 different types of "inversion" in the sense of d

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

ifferent ways to systematically
 map the color solid onto itself without disturbing relations among points in the
 solid. See (Palmer, 1999).
 25. The spectrum inversion argument against functionalism that I have given in
 other places is a straightforward extensional argument. The functional state
 that functionalists must associate with an experience can occur without the
 experience, and conversely. Of course, it is always open to the functionalist to
 complicate the functional role so as to avoid the counterexamples. But so doing
 will in effect bring in physicalist ideas in an ad hoc manner, and so the resulting
 view will be an ad hoc combination of functionalism and physicalism. This issue
 is discussed in more detail in (Block, forthcoming). Patricia and Paul Churchland
 (1981) argue that although spectrum inversion is clearly possible, nonetheless
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 112/Ned Block
 functionalism wins. Their reason is that a functionalist natural kind will be more
 natural than a qualia centered natural kind, the latter being unnatural from the
 point of view of neuroscience. However, they do not take on the issue of whether
 the ad hoc changes I just mentioned will push the functionalist kind below the
 qualia-centered kind in naturalness.
 26. One example: Subjects do adapt?experientially?to goggles that are colored
 with one color on one side and another on the other side. But in that case, there
 is a line in the middle of the visual field where the colors meet and that is the
 kind of defect that the visual system is built to adapt to.
 27. Let me remind the reader that I am assuming a weak form of physicalism in which
 phenomenal character is supervenient on the physical body and its surrounding
 current and past environment. See footnote 13.
 28. Called the "intra-inner" argument in (Shoemaker, 1996a).
 29. I am grateful to Dr. Peter Lang, Department of P?diatrie Cardiology at
 Children's Hospital Boston, for filling me in on this issue. The description in
 the text concerns "dextro" or "complete" transposition of the great arteries.
 See the Wikipedia entry at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dextro-transposition_
 of_the_great_arteries.
 30. Shoemaker's 1984 discussion takes it much more seriously.
 References
 Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
 Bacon, J, Campbell, K., & Reinhardt, L. (1993). Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in
 Honour of D. M. Armstrong. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 Block, N. (1978). Troubles with functionalism. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
 9, 261-325.
 Block, N. (1980). Are Absent Qualia Impossible? Philosophical Review, 89, 251-21 A.
 Block, N. (1983). Mental pictures and cognitive science. Philosophical Review, 93, 499-542.
 Block, N. (1990). Inverted Earth. In J. Tomberlin (Ed.), Philosophical Perspectives 4. Atascadero,
 CA: Ridgeview.
 Block, N. (1994). Qualia. In S. Guttenplan (Ed.), A Companion to Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:
 Oxford University Press.
 Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
 Sciences, 18(2), 227-247.
 Block, N. (1996). Mental Paint and Mental Latex. Philosophical Issues, 7, 19^9.
 Block, N. (1999). Sexism, Racism, Ageism and the Nature of Consciousness. Philosophical
 Topics, 26(1 &2).
 B

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

lock, N. (2002). The Harder Problem of Consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, XCIX(%), 1-35.
 Block, N. (2003). Mental Paint. In M. Hahn & B. Ramberg (Eds.), Reflections and Replies:
 Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler B?rge (pp. 165-200). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Block, N. (forthcoming). Functional Reduction. In T. Horgan & M. H. Sabates & D. Sosa
 (Eds.), Supervenience in Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Block, N., & Fodor, J. A. (1972). What psychological states are not. Philosophical Review, 81,
 159-181.
 Boghossian, P., & Velleman, J. D. (1989). Color as a secondary quality. Mind, 98, 81-103.
 Boghossian, P., & Velleman, J. D. (1991). Physicalist theories of color. Philosophical Review,
 100, 67-106.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 113
 Broackes, J. (2007). Black and White and the Inverted Spectrum. The Philosophical Quarterly,
 57(227), 161-175.
 B?rge, T. (2003). Qualia and Intentional Content: Reply to Block. In M. Hahn & B. Ramberg
 (Eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler B?rge (pp. 405-416).
 Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Byrne, A. (2001). Intentionalism Defended. The Philosophical Review, 110, 199-240.
 Byrne, A. (2006). Inverted Qualia. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 (Vol. Winter 2006 Edition). Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab of the Center
 for the Study of Language and Information
 Byrne, A., & Hubert, D. R. (1997). Colors and reflectances. In A. Byrne & D. R. Hilbert (Eds.),
 Readings on Color, Volume 1: The Philosophy of Color. MIT Press.
 Byrne, A., & Hilbert, D. R. (2003). Color realism and color science. Behavioral and Brain
 Sciences, 26, 3-21.
 Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory: Cambridge University
 Press.
 Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory: Oxford University
 Press.
 Chalmers, D. (2002). Does Conceivability Entail Possibility. In T. Gendler & J. Hawthorne
 (Eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Chalmers, D. (2004). The Representational Character of Experience. In B. Leiter (Ed.), The
 Future for Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Churchland, P. (2002). Brain-Wise: Studies in Neurophilosophy. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Churchland, P. M. (1984). Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Churchland, P. M., & Churchland, P. S. (1981). Functionalism, Qualia and Intentionality.
 Philosophical Topics, 72(121-132).
 Clark, A. (1985). Spectrum Inversion and the Color Solid. Southern Journal Of Philosophy,
 23{A), 431-443.
 Clark, A. (2000). A Theory of Sentience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Cohen, J. (2001). Color, Content and Fred: On a Proposed Reductio of the Inverted Spectrum
 Hypothesis. Philosphical Studies, 103, 121-144.
 Cole, D. (1990). Functionalism and Inverted Spectra. Synthese, 82, 207-222.
 Crane, T. (2000). The Origins of Qualia. In T. Crane & S. Patterson (Eds.), History of the
 Mind-Body Problem. London: Routledge.
 Crane, T. (2001). Elements of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Davies, M. (1997). Externalism and Experience. In N. Block & O. Flanagan & G. G?zeldere
 (Eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates (pp. 309-327). Cambridge
 MA: MIT Press.
 Dennett, D. (1988). Quining Qualia. In A. Marcel & E. Bisiach (Eds.),

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 Consciousness in
 Contemporary Science (pp. 381-414). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown.
 Dennett, D. C. (1968). The nature of images and the introspective trap, Content and Conscious
 ness. London: Routledge.
 Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Farrell, B. (1950). Experience. Mind, 59, 170-198.
 Field, H. (1973). Theory Change and the Indeterminacy of Reference. Journal of Philosophy,
 70(14), 462^81.
 Frege, G (1884/1953). The Foundations of Arithmetic. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Gendler, T., & Hawthorne, J. (2002). Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press.
 Hardin, C. L. (1997). Reinventing the Spectrum. In A. Byrne and D. R. Hilbert (Eds.), Readings
 on Color, Volume 1: The Philosophy of Color. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Harman, G (1990). The Intrinsic Quality of Experience. Philosophical Perspectives, 4, 31-52.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 114/Ned Block
 Harrison, B. (1973). Form and Content. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Hubert, D. R., & Kalderon, M. E. (2000). Color and the Inverted Spectrum. In S. Davis (Ed.),
 Color Perception: Philosophical, Psychological, Artistic and Computational Perspectives.
 Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Hill, C. S. (1991). Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
 University Press.
 Horwich, P. (in progress). The 'Mystery' of Consciousness, a chapter of an unpublished draft of
 a book on Wittgenstein.
 Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 Kind, A. (2003). What's so Transparent about Transparency. Philosophical Studies, 775(3),
 225-244.
 Kirk, R. (1982). Goodbye to Transposed Qualia. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 82,
 33^4.
 Kriegel, U. (2002). Phenomenal Content. Erkentniss, 57, 175-198.
 Levine, J. (1991). Cool Red. Philosophical Psychology, 4, 27-40.
 Levine, J. (2003). Experience and Representation. In Q. Smith & A. Jokic (Eds.), Consciousness:
 New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Lewis, D. (1970). How to Define Theoretical Terms. Journal of Philosophy, 67, 427-445.
 Linden, D. E. J., Kallenbach, U, Heinecke, A., Singer, W, & Goebel, R. (1999). The myth
 of upright vision. A psychophysical and functional imaging study of adaptation to
 inverting spectacles. Perception, 28(A), 469-481.
 Lycan, W. (1973). Inverted Spectrum. Ratio, 15, 315-319.
 Lycan, W. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Nagel, T (1974). What Is it Like to Be a Bat? The Philosophical Review, LXXXIII(4), 435-450.
 Neitz, I, & Jacobs, G. (1986). Polymorphisms of long-wavelength cones in normal human color
 vision. Nature, 323, 623-625.
 Neitz, M., & Neitz, J. (1998). Molecular genetics and the biological basis of color vision. In
 W G. Backhaus & R. Kliegle & J. S. Werner (Eds.), Color Vision: Perspectives from
 Different Disciplines. Berlin: DeGreuter.
 Nickel, B. (forthcoming). Against Intentionalism. Philosophical Studies.
 Nida-R?melin, M. (1996). Pseudonormal Vision, An Actual Case of Qualia Inversion?
 Philosophical Studies, 82, 145-157.
 Nida-R?melin, M. (1999a). Intrinsic Phenomenal Properties in Color Vision Science: A Reply
 to Peter Ross. Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 571-574.
 Nida-R?melin, M. (1999b). Pseudonormal Visi

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

on and Color Qualia. In S. HamerofF & A.
 Kaszniak & D. Chalmers (Eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness HI: The Third
 Tucson Discussions and Debates (Vol. III). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Palmer, S. (1999). Color, Consciousness and the Isomorphism Constraint. Behavioral and Brain
 Sciences, 22, 923-943.
 Pautz, A. (2005). Sensory Awareness is not a Wide Physical Relation. Nous, 40, 205-240.
 Peacocke, C (1993). Review of M. Tye, The Imagery Debate. Phiosophy of Science, 60, 675-677.
 Putnam, H. (1967). The nature of mental states. In W Capit?n & D Merrill (Eds.), Art, Mind,
 and Religion. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.
 Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, Truth and History. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Putnam, H. (1999). The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body and World. New York: Columbia University
 Press.
 Rey, G. (1992). Sensational Sentences Switched. Philosophical Studies, 68, 289-319.
 Rey, G. (1998). A Narrow Representationalist Account of Qualitative Experience. Philosphical
 Perspectives, 12, 435-458.
 Rhees, R. (1968). Notes for Lectures on "Private Experience" and "Sense Data": Note on the
 Text. The Philosophical Review, 77(3), 271-275.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Wittgenstein and Qualia / 115
 Ross, P. W (1999). Color science and spectrum inversion: A reply to Nida R?melin. Conscious
 ness and Cognition, 8, 566-570.
 Shoemaker, S. (1975). Functionalism and Qualia. Philosophical Studies, 27, 291-315.
 Shoemaker, S. (1982). The Inverted Spectrum. The Journal of Philosophy, 79, 357-381.
 Shoemaker, S. (1984). Postscript to "The Inverted Spectrum". In S. Shoemaker (Ed.), Identity
 Cause and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Shoemaker, S. (1994a). Phenomenal Character. Nous, 28, 21-38.
 Shoemaker, S. (1994b). Self-knowledge and "inner sense". Philosophy and Phenomenological
 Research, 54, 249-314.
 Shoemaker, S. (1996a). Intrasubjective/intersubjective. In S. Shoemaker (Ed.), The first-person
 perspective and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Shoemaker, S. (1996b). The First-Person Perspective and Other Essays. Cambridge, UK:
 Cambridge University Press.
 Shoemaker, S. (2006). The Frege-Schlick View. In J. Thomson (Ed.), Content and Modality (pp.
 18-33). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Stalnaker, R. (1999). Comparing Qualia Across Persons. Philosophical Topics, 26, 385-405.
 Stalnaker, R. (2006). Shoemaker, "The Frege-Schlick View". In J. Thomson (Ed.), Content and
 Modality (pp. 254-257). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Stoljar, D. (2006). Ignorance and Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Taylor, D. (1966). The Incommunicability of Content. Mind, 75, 527-541.
 Thau, M. (2002). Consciousness and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content: MIT Press.
 Tye, M. (2002). Representationalism and the Transparency of Experience. Nous, 36(1), 137-151.
 White, S. (1986). Curse of the Qualia. Synthese, 68, 333-368.
 Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, Second Edition. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Wittgenstein, L. (1968). Notes for Lectures on "Private Experience" and "Sense Data". The
 Philosophical Review, 77(3), 275-320.
 Wittgenstein, L. (1993). Notes for Lectures on "Private Experience" and "Sense Data

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

". In J.
 Klagge & A. Normann (Eds.), Ludwig Wittgenstein: Philosophical Occasions 1912
 1951. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)114.30.101.13 on Sun, 04 Jun 2023 08:17:40 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
