# Readings pack: stage1_aesthetics

The following passages are the readings the agent should reference. Cite specific lines or paragraphs when pointing the student toward them. Do not summarise unprompted.

=== Wimsatt & Beardsley — The Intentional Fallacy ===

THE INTENTIONAL FALLACY

BY w. K. WIMSATT, JR. AND M. C. BEARDSLEY

He owns with toil he wrote the following scenes;
But, if they're naught, ne'er spare him for his pains:
Damn him the more; have no commise�ation
For dullness on mature deliberation.

\V1LLIAM CoNGREVE, Prologue to
The Way of the World

T

HE claim of the author's "intention" upon the critic's
judgment has been challenged in a number of recent dis­
cussions, notably in the debate entitled The Personal
Heresy, between Professors Lewis and Till yard, and at least im­
plicitly in periodical essays like those in the "Symposiums" of
1940 in the Southern and Kenyon Reviews. 1 But it seems doubt­
ful if this claim and most of its romantic corollaries are as yet
subject to any widespread questioning. The present writers, in
a short article entitled "Intention" for a Dictionary2 of literary
criticism, raised the issue but were unable to pursue its implica­
tions at any length. \Ve argued that the design or intention of
the author is neither available nor desirable as a standard for
judging the success of a work of literary art1 and it seems to us
that this is a principle which goes deep into some differences in
the history of critical attitudes. It is a principle which accepted
or rejected points to the polar opposites of classical "imitation"
and romantic expression. It entails many specific truths about
inspiration, authenticity, biography, literary history and scholar­
ship, and about some trends of contemporary poetry, especially
its allusiveness. There is hardly a problem of literary criticism
in which the critic's approach will not be qualified by his view
of "intention."

"Intention," as we shall use the term, corresponds to what he
intended in a formula which more or less explicitly has had wide
acceptance. "In order to judge the poet's performance, we must

WIMSATT AND BEARDSLEY

469

know what he intended." Intention is design or plan in the au­
thor's mind. Intention has obvious affinities for the author's at­
titude toward his work, the way he felt, what made him write.

We begin our discussion with a series of propositions sum­
marized and abstracted to a degree where they seem to us axio­
matic, if not truistic.

1. A poem does not come into existence by accident. The
words of a poem, as Professor Stoll has remarked, come out of
a head, not out of a hat. Yet to insist on the designing intellect
as a cause of a poem is not to grant the design or intention as a
standard.

2. One must ask how a critic expects to get an answer to the
question about intention. How is he to find out what the poet
tried to do? If the poet succeeded in doing it, then the poem itself
shows what he was trying to do. And if the poet did not succeed,
then the poem is not adequate evidence, and the critic must go
outside the poem-for evidence of an intention that did not be­
come effective in the poem. "Only one caveat must be borne in
mind," says an eminent intentionalist' in a moment when his the­
ory repudiates itself; "the poet's aim must be judged at the mo­
ment of the creative act, that is to say, by the art of the poem
itself."

3. Judging a poem is like judging a pudding or a machine.
One demands that it work. It is only because an artifact works
that we infer the intention of an artificer. "A poem should not
mean but be." A poem can be only through its meaning-since
its medium is words-yet it is, simply is, in the sense that we have
no excuse for inquiring what part is intended or meant.' Poetry
is a feat of style by which a complex of meaning is handled all
at once. Poetry succeeds because all or most of what is said or
implied is relevant; what is irrelevant has been excluded, like
lumps from pudding and "bugs" from machinery. In this re­
spect poetry differs from practical messages, which are success-


470

THE INTENTIONAL FALLACY

ful if and only if we correctly infer the intention. They are
more abstract than poetry.

4. The meaning of a poem may certainly be a personal one, in
the sense that a poem expresses a personality or state of soul
rather than a physical object like an apple. But even a short
lyric poem is dramatic, the response of a speaker ( no matter how
abstractly conceived) to a situation ( no matter how universal­
ized). We ought to impute the thoughts and attitudes of the
poem immediately to the dramatic speaker, and if to the author
at all, only by a biographical act of inference.

5. If there is any sense in which an author, by revision, has
better achieved his original intention, it is only the very abstract,
tautological, sense that he intended to write a better work and
now has done it.
( In this sense every author's intention is the
same.) His former specific intention was not his intention.
"He's the man we were in search of, that's true"; says Hardy's
rustic constable, "and yet he's not the man we were in search of.
For the man we were in search of was not the man we wanted.""

*

* *

* *

* *
"Is not a critic," asks Professor Stoll," ... a judge, who does
not explore his own consciousness, but determines the author's
meaning or intention, as if the poem were a will, a contract, or
the constitution? The poem is not the critic's own."" He has
diagnosed very accurately two forms of irresponsibility, one which
he prefers. Our view is yet different. The poem is not the
critic's own and not the author's (it is detached from the author
at birth and goes about the world beyond his power to intend
about it or control it). The poem belongs to the public. It is
embodied in language, the peculiar possession of the public, and
it is about the human being, an object of public knowledge. What
is said about the poem is subject to the same scrutiny as any
statement in linguistics or in the general science of psychology
or morals. Mr. Richards has aptly called the poem a class­
"a class of experiences which do not differ in any character more

WIMSATT AND BEARDSLEY

471

than a certain amount ... from a standard experience." And
he adds, "Vv e may take as this standard experience the relevant
experience of the poet when contemplating the completed com­
position." Professor vVellek in a fine essay on the problem has
preferred to call the poem "a system of norms," "extracted from
every individual experience," and he objects to Mr. Richards'
deference to the poet as reader. We side with Professor W ellek
in not wishing to make the poet (outside the poem) an authority.
A critic of our Dictionary article, Mr. Ananda K. Coomara­
swamy, has argued1 that there are two kinds of enquiry about a
work of art: ( 1 ) whether the artist achieved his intentions; ( 2)
whether the work of art "ought ever to have been undertaken
at all" and so "whether it is worth preserving." Number (2),
l\!1r. Coomaraswamy maintains, is not "criticism of any work of
art qua work of art," but is rather moral criticism; number ( ! )
is artistic criticism. But we maintain that (2) need not be moral
cr�ticism: that there is another way of deciding whether works
of art are worth preserving and whether, in a sense, they "ought"
to have been undertaken, and this is the way of objective criticism
of works of art as such, the way which enables us to distinguish
between a skilful murder and a skilful poem. A skilful murder
is an example which Mr. Coomaraswamy uses, and in his system
the difference between the murder and the poem is simply a
"moral" one, not an "artistic" one, since each if carried out ac­
cording to plan is "artistically" successful. Vv e maintain that
( 2) is an enquiry of more worth than ( 1 ) , and since ( 2), and
not ( 1) is capable of distinguishing poetry from murder, the
name "artistic criticism" is properly given to (2).

II

It is not so much an empirical as an analytic judgment, not a
historical statement, but a definition, to say that the intentional
fallacy is a romantic one. When a rhetorician, presumably of the
first century A.D., writes: "Sublimity is the echo of a great soul,"

=== The Intentional and the Unintentional ===

48

dario compagno

6. The Intentional and the Unintentional

Theoretical simplifications in the nineteenth century attributed to the author
either a precise conscious plan (well defined ‘in the head’ up to the smallest
detail) or a messy net of idiosyncratic associations (over which s/he has no
control). What emerged in the end is the need for an author, for a real person
who could be held responsible for the sense of writing, and could therefore
confute inappropriate interpretations. The author shows up in interpretation
well before biographies and in genetic comparisons: it is a matter of seeing
the result of human action in literary and artistic works.

As we have seen, the first phase of approaches to the author implicitly
postulated a hidden, interior intention that could not be reached by analyses.
The ‘real intentions’ of writing were confined to an unreachable subjectivity,
and the public aspects of writing were consequently belittled, given that they
could not point to the hidden ‘real intention’ in the author. But, actually, in
interpretation anything is better than nothing, and some indications about
the author’s intention have been recognized to be available and needed. If this
is true, then it is better to build up an author as best as we can. A pragmatic
approach to the author recognizes the fallibility of interpretation, but values
all clues that can help to understand intentions in the act of writing itself, and
so to see alternatives and choices in the words and sentences actually used.

The twentieth-century hunting season for the author showed above all
that a minimal meaning attributed to a minimal author is very hard to find
and define. On the other hand, the ends of speakers and writers do emerge
from the historical and communicative context: they are not unavoidably lost
after the author’s physical death, because they never lived inside the author
in the first place. Authors live in their works. There was in Dante no hidden
res, there was no private ‘real intention’; if there were one, then we would be
justified to stop looking for it (given its disappearance), and only concentrate
on language. But intention is public, and lives in the acts performed: it does
not disappear, or all meaning would also disappear at the same time.10 There-
fore, given (1) the need for an author, (2) the availability of intentions, (3)
the difficulty in building a minimal author and meaning, then (4) we need to
understand the author as best as we can, by all means necessary. Otherwise we
would risk making the author say whatever we preferred. As a matter of fact,








theories of authorship

49

whenever we build up a formal or minimal author, we are just projecting our
intention into the text.11 Referring to the author, on the other hand, permits
us to evaluate the correctness of our interpretation.

Luigi Pareyson blamed Croce because for the latter the productive act had
no value per se, and was only a means to express the universal idea behind the
work. Pareyson had a very different theory about artistic creation: it is human
action that gives artistic works their value, and ‘it is necessary to consider art
more as a “doing” than as an “expressing” or “contemplating” ’ (1974, 7; my
translation). The artistic intention emerges in interpretation, and the interpreter
needs to reactivate the author’s intention in order to understand the work.
Intentions are formed along the creative process and persist in the work’s form.
The matter is then how to understand the intentions of an author that make
a work of art out of wood, or a piece of paper and some ink.

Umberto Eco elaborates on Pareyson’s theory. Eco looks for an inten-
tion also in those open works whose meaning apparently does not depend on
their author’s project, either because random processes of creation played a
major role in their production, or because the author left in them an ample
space for interpretative freedom. Eco’s theory is far from Barthes’s and Der-
rida’s ideas. For Eco, we need to look for and find an intention in order to
recognize a work of art as such. Art, in other words, is always intentional,
although some relevant parts of its expression and/or meaning can be left open
to the interpreter’s freedom. The author of an open work ‘wanted to provoke
a feeling of suspension, of indeterminateness’ (1989, 116). Not all works of
art are open works; but there is also an author’s intention in open works: the
intention to make an open work, in a certain way and for a certain end. Any
work, ‘even before becoming a field of actualizable choices, is already a field
of actualized choices’, and ‘the original gesture, fixed by and in the sign, is in
itself a direction that will eventually lead us to the discovery of the author’s
intention’ (101-103). To interpret is then a matter of cooperating with the
author’s intention, as it is put into form in the work (Eco 1979).

For Barthes and Derrida the author’s intention was a dull limit that the
critic had to avoid, while Eco looks for an intention that is public (intentio operis,
as in Eco 1990), and not ‘in the head’ of the author, defined up to the smallest
detail before even taking up the pen (intentio auctoris).12 This public intention
leaves some freedom to the interpreter, an open field of possibilities, but not
complete freedom. It may happen that a work does really escape from the author’s
control and begins to produce meaning by itself, but in that case ‘what remains
then is no longer a field of possibilities but rather the indistinct, the primary,
the indeterminate at its wildest – at once everything and nothing’ (1989, 93).
Eco’s intention is perfectly compatible and complementary with
Anscombe’s. Intentions are semiotic realities, existing only within our public
interpretation of actions and texts. Without intentions we could not give form
to acts and texts (that are both the result of intentional activities), and intentions


50

dario compagno

are neither hidden res in the brain nor private experiences accessible only to
oneself. Moreover, intentions can be (and for the later Eco always are, at least in
part) open; whenever we act, our end is never defined up to the smallest detail,
‘because the intention itself was open, aiming at a plural communication’ (102;
my emphasis). Openness is a property of language and of thought, depriving
the will-to-say of the conscious perfection wanted by Husserl, but granting a
partially-conscious directive power to it. We are not fully conscious of what we
mean, whenever we speak or write, but we are conscious of at least some of the
sense effects we want to obtain by speaking and writing.

The consequences of writing are only partially foreseen, and writers try to
understand at their best the ways in which interpreters will read their works. This
indeterminacy does not make our intentions less legitimate: that of a perfectly
defined, ‘crystalline closed’ intended meaning in the mind is a wrong idea. What
we think is analogous to what we write, with all the uncertainties and blank
spaces (intentionally or not) left to the reader. Anscombe and Eco show that
intentions are public and open, against the two phenomenological ‘myths’ of a hidden
interiority and of a perfect definition. Barthes and Derrida could not recognize
that something in the text is intentional and something else is not, otherwise
they would have had to admit that the (however polysemic) author’s intention
remains in the text and in its interpretation. Anscombe and Eco actively look
for clues to better interpretations and, when doing so, find an intention at work.
Thus, the later developments of twentieth-century reflection on subjectivity
and language completely overturned the original statements about an ‘intentional
fallacy’. Interpretation is a matter of recognizing what is intentional: where the
work begins and ends, and what is planned within it. There is also the need
to recognize what is unintentional, above and beyond the author’s intention –
otherwise the author would become a god-like entity with a perfect control over
language and with an unrealistically clear idea of the ends and consequences
of his or her actions. In practice, while interpreting a text, we need to distribute
intended and non-intended messages: the way in which we realize this distribution
determines the resulting meaning. For example, it is very different to understand
a certain sentence as ironic or not; it depends on how we give shape to the
author’s intention, on the basis of all the data we manage to find and to our
reasoning. Attributing or not-attributing an intentional ironic message to a
sentence depends on the hypothesis we make about the author (while the sentence
itself remains the same in both readings). For example, to talk about our
friend’s mismatched socks can be done intentionally or not: it is all important
to understand what is the case, in order to interpret the actual sense and use of
what we say. And this applies also in case of intentional ambiguity.

This is the exact opposite of asserting that the author’s intention is ‘neither
available nor desirable’, as New Criticism suggested. Intention is always at stake
and in discussion. The author cannot be exhausted, fully understood, because
interpretation (from a pragmatic standpoint) is a nearly never-ending activity.


theories of authorship

51

But intention remains the only limit to interpretation and the only possibility to
negotiate our proper reading with others on a public basis. Intention is actually
the opposite of what Husserl and the New Critics thought: intention is an
entirely public benchmark, to be defined according to textual and contextual
evidence against which diverse interpretations can be compared. Intention
is public and visible, and not something hidden within the author. To be an
author (and also to simply communicate) is a matter of publicly expressing
something, and not at all keeping it private for oneself. There is nothing
unreachable in communication, and especially not the author’s intention.

I hope I have given an adequate idea of the richness and complexity of
the debate on authorship and interpretation as it developed throughout the
whole of the twentieth century. The subject, initially marginal, took a long
time to become visible and describable. And every new idea of the author has
been accompanied by a new idea of what a text is, and of how it should be
read: realization of ideal meanings under the control of a transcendental sub-
ject; agglomerate of citations under the drives of the unconscious; intentional
product of an author with a partially conscious strategy in mind. Only this
last idea needs an effective, ‘useful’ concept of author: a person writing for an
end, even if s/he may not be able to foresee all the consequences of his or her
choices. This makes a human out of the author. In this way the word ‘author’
can be pronounced again without prefixes or restrictive attributions, without
seeing in it the residual par excellence, that about which it is not possible to
talk. There is no hidden author. A scapegoat for an entire century, the author
is actually its dearest son, a linking of consciousness and the unconscious.

It was only following the twentieth-century debate that the author was born.

1 This article presents some of the results of my PhD thesis, discussed at the University

of Siena in May, 2010.

2 Wimsatt and Beardsley (1954, 6) completely misunderstood Croce’s theory and in particu-
lar ignored his ‘golden rule’ of dividing mundane intentions from the pure aesthetic intuition (see
also Benedetti 1999, 41). Croce did not attribute the original formulation of the ‘golden rule’ to
himself, but to the Italian critic Francesco De Sanctis and to Pëtr Kropotkin. New Criticism gave
resonance to an approach that was well-known and recognized in nineteenth-century Europe.
3 Eric Hirsch proposes a form of intentionalism explicitly rooted in Husserl's phenomenol-
ogy. Hirsch is only interested in meaning-intentions (Bedeutungsintentionen), and not in lived
intentions (Absichten). From our perspective, Hirsch’s position adds nothing to the ‘intentional
fallacy’. Hirsch’s author is an ideal author (literary transposition of the transcendental subject),
emptied of lived intentions, and fully aware of objective meanings independent from historical
change: ‘an unlimited number of intentional acts can intend the same verbal meaning’ (1967, 38).
4 Important sources for the ‘death of the Author’ proposed by Barthes, and for French

post-structuralism in general, are Lacan (1966) and Benveniste (1966).

5 Understanding the real extension of Barthes’s ‘death of the author’ would require much more
space than is allowed here. Let us simply say that it is not fully clear whether Barthes (1967) refers
to all literary works, to all contemporary literary works, or to some contemporary literary works.


52

dario compagno

6 Foucault’s move drastically changes the perspective in which we observe texts and authors.
It is a matter of viewing authors as functions of texts, by which we ‘build’ and understand
what we read. On the contrary, texts have been usually thought as ‘signs’ of the author’s genius
and creativity. As H.W. Gabler makes very clear in his contribution to the present volume,
this revolution in perspective represents in a much better way how scholars actually deal with
texts and promotes further effects in contemporary critical and interpretative practices. The
concept of text itself emerges as a literate construction involving material documents on the
one hand, and hypotheses about the author’s work and will on the other.

7 Booth’s author is implied and not implicit. Implied by the very existence of the text, as
my coffee on the table implies that someone made it. Explicit and implicit messages are both
to be referred to the author.

8 Actually, Foucault’s position can be interpreted as saying that the ordinary concept
of author has to be substituted by the author-function, meaning that there is no hidden ‘real
author’ but only an effective semiotic figure built by discourses. This interpretation would
imply that Foucault also held that the author function manifests all of the author’s intention
and ‘interiority’, as Elisabeth Anscombe more explicitly stated (see section 5).

9 Derrida (1967) complained that Husserl did not take the distinction between linguistic mean-
ing and intuitive knowledge far enough. Language was important for Husserl (it shaped thought),
but not important enough, and private intuition kept the ruling role. Wittgenstein and Anscombe,
on the other hand, attributed overriding importance to language, and left no knowing capacity for
private intuition. To know what I think, I need to listen to what I say: this idea is common to Der-
rida and Wittgenstein. There are many other analogies between the two thinkers (see Staten 1985).
10 Whenever we become unable to read an ancient language, we lose at the same time the

texts’ meaning and their authors’ intentions.

11 Eco (1990) calls this intentio lectoris. For example, if my wife tells me that she’s going
to buy some cigarettes, and I believe this to be a subliminal message and that she will never
return, very often I am just reading in the words something that is not there. A reference to the
situation of utterance, and to our life in general, would be the only way to guide interpreta-
tion (in fact, every sentence is potentially ambiguous, but not all are intentionally ambiguous;
see Eco’s openness).

12 Compagnon (1998) believes that Eco’s intentio operis is just another way of talking
about texts (against the complete freedom accorded to the reader by deconstruction) without
including their authors. But Eco’s pragmatic theory of interpretation could not do without
the author’s intentions, strategies and choices. The intentio operis is Eco’s proper way to define a
purely semiotic intention, existing only in operari and not in mentis.

Works Cited

Anscombe Elisabeth (1957), Intention, Oxford, Blackwell.
Barthes Roland (1967), La mort de l’auteur, Paris, Éditions du Seuil. Engl. trans. ‘The
Death of the Author’, in S. Heath, ed. (1977), Image-Music-Text, London, Mill
and Wang, 142-148.

Benedetti Carla (1999), L’ombra lunga dell’autore, Milano, Feltrinelli.
Bennett Andrew (2005), The Author, London and New York, Routledge.
Benveniste Émile (1966), Problèmes de linguistique générale, Paris, Gallimard.
Bernet Rudolf (1990), ‘Derrida et la voix de son maître’, Revue philosophique de la
France et de l’étranger CLXXX, 2, 147-168. Engl. trans., ‘Derrida and His Master’s
Voice’, in Z. Direk and L. Lawlor, eds (2002), Jacques Derrida. Critical Assessments
of Leading Philosophers, vol. I, London and New York, Routledge, 250-266.
Booth Wayne (1961), The Rhetoric of Fiction, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press.


theories of authorship

53

Bouveresse Jacques (1987), Le mythe de l’intériorité, Paris, Minuit.
Burke Sean (1998 [1992]), The Death and the Return of the Author, Edinburgh,

Edinburgh University Press.

Compagno Dario (2010), Attorno alla ‘morte dell’autore’. Indagine sulla soggettività nelle
teorie semiotiche del Novecento, unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Siena.
Compagnon Antoine (1998), Le Démon de la théorie, Paris, Seuil. Engl. trans. (2004),

Literature, Theory, and Common Sense, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Croce Benedetto (1941 [1936]), La poesia, Bari, Laterza.
Derrida Jacques (1967), La voix et le phénomène, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France.
Eco Umberto (1962), Opera aperta, Milano, Bompiani. Engl. trans. (1989), The Open

Work, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Eco Umberto (1979), Lector in Fabula, Milano, Bompiani. Engl. trans. (1979), The
Role of the Reader, Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts, Bloomington, Indiana
University Press.

Eco Umberto (1990), I limiti dell’interpretazione, Milano, Bompiani. Engl. trans.
(1991), The Limits of Interpretation, Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
Foucault Michel (1969), ‘Qu’est-ce qu’un auteur?’, Bulletin de la Société française de
philosophie, 63, 3, 73-104. Engl. trans., ‘What is an Author?’, in P. Rabinow,
ed. (1984), The Foucault Reader, New York, Pantheon, 101-120.

Gabler H.W. (2012), ‘Beyond Author-Centricity in Scholarly Editing’, in this volume.
Hirsch Eric (1967), Validity in Interpretation, New Haven, Yale University Press.
Husserl Edmund (1900), Logische Untersuchungen, vol. I, Leipzig, Veit. Engl. trans
(1970), Logical Investigations, vol. I, London and New York, Routledge.
Husserl Edmund (1913), Ideen zu einer reiner Phänomenologie und phänomenologische
Philosophie, Den Haag, Nijhoof. Engl. trans. (1982), Ideas Pertaining to a Pure
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, The Hague, Nijhoff.
Husserl Edmund (1929), Formale und transzendentale Logik, Den Haag, Nijhoof.
Engl. trans. (1969), Formal and Transcendental Logic, The Hague, Nijhoff.
Irwin William, ed. (2002), The Death and Resurrection of the Author?, Westport,

Greenwood.

Lacan Jacques (1966), ‘Subversion du sujet et dialectique du désir dans l’inconscient

freudien’, in id., Écrits, Paris, Seuil, 793-827.
Pareyson Luigi (1974 [1954]), Estetica, Firenze, Sansoni.
Peirce C.S. (1868), ‘Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Men’,

Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2, 103-114.

Ricoeur Paul (1969), Le conflit des interprétations, Paris, Seuil. Engl. trans. (1974),
The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics, Evanston, Northwestern
University Press.

Sacks Sheldon (1964), Fiction and the Shape of Belief, Chicago, The University of

Chicago Press.

Staten Henry (1985), Wittgenstein and Derrida, Oxford, Blackwell.
Wimsatt W.K. and Monroe Beardsley (1954), ‘The Intentional Fallacy’, in The Verbal

Icon, Lexington, Kentucky University Press, 3-18.

Wittgenstein Ludwig (1953), Philosophische Untersuchungen, Oxford, Blackwell.
Wittgenstein Ludwig (1958), The Blue and the Brown Book, Oxford, Blackwell.
Wittgenstein Ludwig (1967), Zettel, Oxford, Blackwell.

=== On the Interpretation of Art Works (Theme 4) ===

THEME 4
On the Interpretation of
Art Works

Our previous Theme considered the nature of art and its value. However, often underlying our
assessments of art are questions of interpretation. What does a work of art actually mean? Should
we look for meaning at all? And where and how should we look for it? Can works of art carry
moral meanings? These questions are our focus in this Theme.

As with our previous Theme, it will be useful to draw on any experiences of art available to you.
The term ‘art’ covers a multitude of forms, including novels, poetry, plays, songs, all styles of
music, dance, sculpture, installation, film, photography, graphic design, architecture, painting,
drawing and animation. Reflecting on your past and present encounters with these artforms, as
well as organising new experiences of art ~ such as a visit to a local gallery - will enhance your
philosophical exploration of how we find meaning in art.

Introductory Activities

Pablo Picasso’s Guernica (1937) is among the most famous paintings of the twentieth century.
Picasso created it during the Spanish Civil War in response to the bombings of a small town
named Guernica in northern Spain.

The painting is generally interpreted as a depiction of the suffering which war inflicts upon
innocent civilians. It has become world famous as an indictment of war.

But is this the only interpretation possible? And is it the only correct interpretation?

DO
Survey your class to find out which students were acquainted with Guernica
prior to the exercise above, and which students were encountering it for the first
time. How did the ‘naive’ interpretations compare with the ‘informed’ ones?

1.

2.

Describe what you see in this painting.

DO
Working by yourself, study the following image and write your own answers to
the questions beneath.

If you are encountering Guernica for the first time, what do you see? Do you see images of war,
terror, violence, chaos and suffering? Do you read a political message? If you see something
quite different from the orthodox interpretation of this work, who is to say yours is not a valid
interpretation, an equally important way of finding meaning in this artwork?

What do you think the artist is trying to depict in this painting?
Does this painting have a particular point of view? Could it be said that this
painting contains an argument? Why or why not?
Do you recognise this painting and its artist? How does that recognition — or
lack thereof — affect the way you approach the image?

Further Problems in Value Theory

And what is the status of the view communicated by Picasso’s painting? Is this just as powerful
an indictment of war as a philosophical argument for pacifism? Or can it be said that Picasso has
produced a philosophical argument ~ and if so, what are its premises and conclusions?

THINK
Can art be philosophy? Can it be said to produce arguments? Can you think of
other relevant examples to draw into this discussion?

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

O



 Arbiters of Meaning: Author, Text or Audience?
Intentionalism

Picasso himself stated that his purpose in painting Guernica was to bring international attention
to the bombing of civilians by Germans, who were supporting General Franco during the Spanish
Civil War. Picasso was inspired by an eyewitness report by journalist George Steer, published in
both the New York Times and The Times, two days after the bombings. Within six weeks, Picasso,
working in Paris, had completed the massive mural-size canvas, and the painting spent the next
several years touring the globe and gaining the exposure its artist hoped for. Picasso expressed his
wish that Guernica should not come to Spain, his country of origin, until freedom and democracy
had been re-established. It arrived in Spain in 1981 and now hangs in the Reina Sofia Gallery,
Madrid.

For those who follow the intentionalist theory of art, this information about Guernica’s context
and Picasso’s intentions is crucial if we are to make an accurate interpretation of the artwork.
According to the intentionalist theory, if we can obtain knowledge about the artist, his life,
his intentions and state of mind when he created a particular work of art, we will have the
definitive and authoritative account of what the work is meant to convey. We can then judge how
successfully it achieves these aims. In other words, intentionalism says that a work of art means
whatever its creator intended it to mean.

DISCUSS

1.

In your opinion, how relevant to the meaning of the painting Guernica is
contextual information?

You will no doubt be familiar with this idea, as it still resonates today. R.G.Collingwood (Famous
Philosopher File p.526), whose work we read about in the previous Theme, was clearly influenced
by Romanticism. In arguing that the worth of a piece of art lies in its expression of the artist’s
emotion, Collingwood implies that (a) the artist has an emotional intensity which the rest of us
would benefit from sharing in, and (b) to understand or value the artwork, we need some insight
into the state of mind of the artist (see Text Study, p.526).

WRITE

1.

2.

What is the ‘Romantic’ view of the artist? Describe it in a couple of sentences.

Reflect upon the way you regard creators in various artforms (for example, your
favourite authors, actors, directors, musicians and so on). To what extent do you
subscribe to this Romantic view? Why?

DISCUSS

When the news broke in 2007 it caused a sensation through news media worldwide.
After reading from Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows at New York’s Carnegie
Hall, author J. K. Rowling took questions from her audience of 1,600 students. In
response to a query about Dumbledore’s love life, Rowling replied,
‘My truthful answer to you... I always thought of Dumbledore as gay.’ *

Rowling’s stunned audience took its time to recover from the
bombshell before bursting into applause. Within minutes,
international headlines screamed, ‘Dumbledore is gay!’

KANT, THE ROMANTICS AND THE AUTHORITY OF GENIUS

Does knowledge of Picasso’s stated intentions in painting Guernica enhance
your appreciation for the work?

Does knowledge of Picasso’s intentions in painting Guernica make alternative
interpretations wrong?

In what ways might the intentionalist theory be problematic? Brainstorm a list of
responses on your classroom whiteboard.

Rowling explained to her Carnegie Hall audience that when reading
a film script for one of her books, she had to reject a newly created
Dumbledore back-story about a supposed past crush on a girl,
scribbling ‘Dumbledore is gay!’ in the margin.

Further Problems in Value Theory

One of the defining features of the so-called Romantic era - spanning the nineteenth century
~ was the elevation of the artist to the status of heroic and inspired genius. This was the word
used by Immanuel Kant (Famous Philosopher File p.111) in his Critique of Judgment (1790). Kant
argued that because art does not follow rules, artistic talent cannot be taught. It must therefore
be innate and intuitive. The artist of Romantic imagination was a driven by special sensitivity
and insight. The implication of this view for interpreting works of art is that the artist has unique
authority, which should be revered.

How are we to take this new data about a fictional character? Does Rowling, as
author, have unique authority to banish alternative interpretations with a ‘fact’ about
her creation, Dumbledore?

Should interpretations of the Harry Potter books which differ from Rowling’s be
considered wrong?

‘Dumbledore was gay, JK tells amazed fans’ by David Smith, Sunday 21st October 2007,
http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/oct/21/film.books (accessed September Ist, 2013)

Is ita ‘fact’ that Dumbledore is gay if J.K.Rowling says he is?

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

2.

1.



Anti-intentionalism

 SCOSPSHS9HSEOSNHHSHSSHSSHOSSSSHSHSSSHSHSSSOHSHHSHHOHSSSSHSSHSSSSRFOOFTFGSGPCCHEBSEBEEaH

e

T.S.ELIOT, NEW CRITICISM AND THE ‘INTENTIONAL FALLACY’

In a reaction against the subjectivism of the Romantics, the poet T.S.Eliot published a landmark
work of literary criticism in 1919. His essay, “Tradition and the Individual Talent’, rejects th
Romantic obsession with the character of the artist, and argues that the only authority on the
meaning of a poem is the poem itself. The artist ‘surrenders’ his work after its creation, accordin
to Eliot. Eliot’s arguments inspired the so-called New Criticism movement of the 1920s an
308, which regarded works of art as autonomous entities and emphasised close analysis of their
internal rather than external features.

Reflecting the New Criticism in many ways, literary theorist W.K. Wimsatt and philosopher
Monroe Beardsley published “The Intentional Fallacy’ in 1954, arguing — to quote the essay’s final
sentence — that ‘critical inquiries are not settled by consulting the oracle’ - that is, the artist. There
is always a problem of access when it comes to an artist’s intention, they contend. We can never
be fully sure of an artist’s complete state of mind when they created a work of art. An artist’s ideas
about her work should thus be considered just one valid interpretation among many. Accordin
to Wimsatt and Beardsley, when assessing the validity of competing interpretations we should
ask questions such as which one best matches the evidence in the text, and which interpretation
allows for the richest and most coherent reading.

On this way of viewing an artwork, its meaning belongs neither to the author nor the reader
but to the art, in itself, separate from its context. The art yields a fixed set of possible meanings
regardless of when it is read or by whom.

DISCUSS

1.

One of Wimsatt and Beardsley’s objections to intentionalism is that we cannot
always be sure of an artist’s intention. Is this a strong objection? Is there any way

it can be overcome to save the intentionalist view?
Should we completely reject contextual information when looking for meaning
in works of art? Why or why not?

D
H
H
H
H
G
H
H
G
H
H
H
H
H
F
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
S
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
S
H
H
H
H
H
H
S
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
S
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
S
H
H
H
S
S
O
C
P

The. areata wl Pale a
enuonmal
raliac

noaey eee

[see Useful Resources]

:

READ Section I of the essay.

1.

What set of assumptions make up what Wimsatt and Beardsley call ‘the
intentional fallacy’?
What are some implications of the view that ‘the design or intention of the
author is neither available nor desirable as a standard for judging the success of

DON'T WORRY ABOUT THIS
BOX, LARA!

a work of literary art?
What do Wimsatt and Beardsley argue is the difficulty of inferring an author's
intention through studying his/her work?
What does it mean to say that ‘a poem should not mean but be’?
According to Wimsatt and Beardsley, can an author's original intention be
revised? Why or why not?
In what sense may a poem/work of art be said to be a public document?
Might there be other justifications for studying the social and publication

context of a text in addition to a concern with its author's intentions:
Does this essay provide valuable insights on the interpretation of artworks?
Which of its points do you find persuasive and why? On what grounds might
this essay be criticised?

6

8
8
9
6
6
0
0
0
8
0
0
6

S
S
H
O
H
H
H
E
H
H
H
G
E
R
H
O
H
H
S
S
H
H
H
S
H
S
H
S
H
S
S
H
S
S
H
H
S
H
H
S
H
S
S
H
S
S
H
S
H
O
H
S
T
S
S
H
H
H
H
H
C
S

COCO SHSSSSHEHSHSHSOHSOSSHHSHHHSHHSHOHSHHHHHHSHOHHHSHHOHHFOHHHSOHSHSSHSHHHHOHOSS

ROLAND BARTHES: DEATH OF THE AUTHOR
Like Wimsatt and Beardsley, Roland Barthes’ Death of the Author (1967) rejects the Romantic view
of the artist as the supreme arbiter of meaning. But Barthes (1915-1980) went further still, denying
the author any role in the ongoing interpretation of her work. According to Barthes, the author
is ‘dead’ once her creation is released to the public. To think otherwise is to ‘close’ the work. For
Barthes, the text is ‘open’ and perpetually recreated every time it is read. It is ‘played’ like a game or a
musical instrument, with readers as active participants in the production of meaning. The meanings
of a text (or work of art) lie in the multiplicity of expanding interpretations made by its readers.

Barthes’ ideas foreshadowed the themes of post-structuralism. Michael Foucault’s “What is an
Author?’ (1969) further diminishes the status of the author. Like Barthes, Foucault (Famous
Philosopher File p.543) rejects views such as those of Eliot, the New Critics and Wimsatt and
Beardsley, who hold the text up as the authority of its own meaning. Rather, for Foucault and post-
structuralist reading, the reader is the authority. Indeed, each act of reading creates a new work,
because, as the post-structuralist argues, every reader brings a vast web of inter-relating meanings
and associations to each encounter they have with a text or artwork. On this account, Rowling's
reading of Dumbledore has no special status whatever, and each reader is free to ‘play’ with the
stories of Harry Potter as they will. Each time you read Harry Potter you will interact with it in
a new way. Foucault argues that it is only because we fear the vast proliferation of alternative
meanings that we try to fix meaning to a single authorial source.

VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Further Problems in Value Theory

=== VCE Aesthetics — chapter on art ===

sults from the size and order of things,
or in other words, from its ?form? (used in a different sense from Plato?s Form). Aristotle gives
particular emphasis to the concept of moderation. If something is too big or small, or otherwise
out of balance, it cannot be beautiful. Beautiful things appear as unified wholes, with all elements
in proportion.
Plato and Aristotle had divergent views on the role of art in society, too. Whereas Plato saw art
as valuable only insofar as it could illuminate truth and virtue, and thus be an edifying influence
upon citizens, Aristotle believed art was valuable in itself. He writes about the ?self-sufficiency? of
art, meaning that art and the pleasure it brings are valuable for their own sake. He argues that it
is natural to enjoy imitation, and defends the value of emotional release through art, a process he
terms catharsis.
506
VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

SOHOSSHSHSHHHHSHHSHHHSHHHHHSHHHSHSHSHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHEHHHSHHHEEO
.e
TEXT STUDY: Aristotle, Poetics (around 335 BCE)
[see Useful Resources]
READ the following passage:
A beautiful object, whether it be a living organism or any whole composed of parts,
must not only have an orderly arrangement of parts, but must also be of a certain
magnitude;
for beauty depends on magnitude and order. Hence a very small animal
organism cannot be beautiful; for the view of it is confused, the object being seen in
an almost imperceptible moment of time. Nor, again, can one of vast size be beautiful;
for as the eye cannot take it all in at once, the unity and sense of the whole is lost for
the spectator; as for instance if there were one a thousand miles long. As, therefore,
in the case of animate bodies and organisms a certain magnitude is necessary, and a
magnitude which may be easily embraced in one view; so in the plot, a certain length
is necessary, and a length which can be easily embraced by the memory.*
To what extent does beauty depend on ?orderly arrangement of parts?, the size of
the parts and the whole?
1.
Working in a small group, test Aristotle?s ideas on five examples of beautiful
things, including examples of artworks. (Try to include examples beyond those
of just visual beauty ? for example, beautiful music, beautiful writing, etc.)
2.
Report your findings back to the class.

x
Aristotle http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/poetics.1.1.html (August 5, 2013)
SPOHOHHSHHHHHSHSHHHSHHHHHHHSHHSHHSHHHHHHHHHHSHHHHSHSHHHSHHHHHHHHHSHSHHHHHB
SCOSSHHSHSHHSHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHSHHHHHHHHHHHSHHHHHHHEO
Since Plato and Aristotle
The theories set out by Plato and Aristotle have been of enormous influence in the conversations
about aesthetics that have occurred since. Plato?s distrust of art was reinforced by the repression
of sensuality advocated by the early Christian church. On the other hand, the idea of beautiful
art being a means to transcendent truth was taken up by St Augustine (Famous Philosopher
File p.201). He promoted the idea of beautiful art as a vehicle for divine revelation. We can see
this idea ? that the beauty of art can bring us closer to God - at work in medieval Christian art.
Meanwhile, Aristotle?s principles of balance, moderation, size and order were developed further
by art theorists and technicians. In medieval times these were seen as the tools for evoking the
beauty of the divine in art.
WRITE
1.
Is beauty subjective or objective, according to Plato and Aristotle?








nfirmed his significance for a very long time.
:
« cucccureceddddbuseecouwesuegeessséb000600anssES eRe
Further Problems in Value Theory
517
;
ah

----- page break -----

The Representational Theory
:
ART AS IMITATION
We are often impressed by how well an artist manages to convey real life in their work. Perhaps
you have appreciated the skill of a fine portrait painter by exclaiming that it looks ?just like a
photo?. You may have heard of method acting - the process which many actors use to immerse
themselves totally in a life like that of the character they are playing. Heath Ledger famously
locked himself in a hotel room for weeks in order to ?become? the sadistic Joker character. His
acclaimed performance won a posthumous Academy Award (but also drove him to sleeplessness
and to the sleeping pills which claimed his life). Do you know anyone who can draw objects in the
world with extraordinary accuracy? Is this skill enough to make them an artist?
The theory that art represents the world realistically, and that good artists are those who can
capture reality in their work, is known as representationism.
Plato is famous for writing about art as representation, although for Plato, this was a reason to
disparage art, as we saw on pages 502-505. Aristotle, by contrast, praised mimicry in artworks.
However, neither philosopher argued that representation should be seen as the defining principle
of art. Indeed, such a theory did not really emerge until the eighteenth century, and it is true
that up to this point, most art was essentially representational. The arrival of the camera in the
nineteenth century called these assumptions into question and was a catalyst for visual artists to
explore other goals in their work, resulting in movements such as impressionism.
From our twenty-first-century vantage point, it is clear that not all art tries to copy or imitate
directly the external world. And is simply to make a copy of the world ever enough to make
something art? Yet it can be argued that any depiction of objects in the world - such as portraiture
or photography - involves interpretation of those objects. The artist makes choices about the
composition and framing of their work, which makes the final piece quite different to behold than
the real person, scene or object. And it is usually because of these other elements of form ? besides
just those of capturing a likeness ? that we regard a painting or photograph as art or as good art.
This is also why we reject forgeries and do not value a copy of an artwork (for example, a print of
a famous painting) as highly as the original.
But it also seems obvious that there are many artforms that are not representational. If music and
abstract painting are to be regarded as art, then surely the representational theory must be false.
It could be responded that perhaps these kinds of art represent feeling, but it is often hard to pin
down just what these feelings might be.
Thus, the representational theory seems to have some severe limitations.
ART AS REPRESENTATION THAT CONVEYS TRUTH
But what about the idea that perhaps art doesn?t reproduce directly a specific item of experience,
but instead conveys a more abstract truth or vision about the world? Perhaps art gives us profound
insight into our lives, ourselves and each other. This view was proposed by Aristotle in his Poetics.
518
VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2

Consider the plays of Shakespeare. The


y are entertaining, often very funny and have been
consistently popular with audiences for centuries. And the most oft-cited reason for this is that
Shakespeare captures eternal truths about human nature; he wisely teaches us to understand
more about ourselves. Similarly, the great symphonies of Beethoven are not ?about? anything in
particular, nor do they stir specific emotions that any two people could readily agree upon. But
it is generally recognised that these works have profound power. They seem to arouse something
deep and eternal in the psyche of the listener and to convey some essence or truth about our
humanity. And what about a painting such as Picasso?s Guernica? Here Picasso conveys the horror
and pointlessness of war with unrivalled power.
Or do you disagree? Perhaps you do not share my responses to the works discussed in the previous
paragraph. You may find Shakespeare?s plays to be boring and believe they add nothing to your
life, arguing that studying Philosophy has given you more profound insight than any work of
art ever could. You may find deep spiritual resonances in the music and lyrics of a band which I
consider to be rubbish. You may contend that the only way to be genuinely horrified by war is to
visit a war zone or read the real accounts of people who have experienced war, rather than look at
a painting by a now-dead Spaniard famous for his personal infidelities. And where does all that
leave the theory that art illuminates and reveals truths about human experience?
)
(/
DISCUSS
[os Go}
1.
How convincing do you find the theory of representationalism as a way
to determine what should be valued as art? What are its advantages and
drawbacks?
2.
Is the theory of art as representing profound truths or insights an improvement
on the theory of art as imitation? Why or why not?
3.
What do you make of the claim that art does not copy reality?
The Subjectivist Theory
Subjectivism holds that any aesthetic judgement is subjective and therefore can tell us only
something about the responses of the person making the judgement, and nothing about the work
of art itself. Therefore, according to subjectivism, there can be no conflict of opinions in aesthetics;
if I say I love a song on Spotify, but you find it hideous, neither of us can be actually wrong.
This is quite an appealing view for reasons you have no doubt already encountered in your
discussions. It allows everyone to make acceptable claims about art regardless of their tastes,
education, social class or cultural group and is thereby an inclusive and anti-elitist position. It also
avoids the problems of trying to find particular factors which might objectively and universally
declare something to be good art (which the formalists try to do, as we shall see).
Further Problems in Value Theory
519

----- page break -----

But are there problems with subjectivism? The subjectivist?s argument often goes like this:
Pl
There is wide divergence of aesthetic judgements.
UP2
Cases where judgements diverge widely cannot be objectively decided.

Cc
Therefore aesthetic judgements must be subjective.
How strong is this argument? Let?s consider Premise 1. One thing that is striking about the history
of art is how much agreement there actually is over what makes something art and what makes it
good. There are very few people who will try and argue that Bach or Shakespeare are rubbish, and
this consensus has been upheld over centuri



blem with the theory of aesthetic emotion is that it doesn?t refer to anything within the
artwork itself. Our responses to works of art can also be very subjective, varying widely from
person to person. So some philosophers have suggested that what it is which engages the aesthetic
emotion is our response to its form, or the particular elements from which it is composed.
We can recognise that a painter makes choices when creating her art: she arranges shapes, colours,
lines and so on, in particular ways. Similarly, a composer uses the elements of music - rhythm,
melody, harmony, timbre and so on ? and combines them in deliberate ways to create something
pleasing. A poet uses rhyme, metre and the sounds of words. A novelist makes choices about plot,
setting, character and so on.
The ways these elements are manipulated by an artist, and the ways the elements relate to one
another, can be judged as effective or ineffective. This is the basis of the formalist theory.
Further Problems in Value Theory
521

----- page break -----

For example, we might judge the elements of a painting to be well balanced, or sculpture to be
pleasingly proportioned. A play may be skilfully acted, well cast, with an interesting set, and
paced to heighten dramatic tension.
We have already considered a version of this theory as articulated by Aristotle. Clive Bell (Famous
Philosopher File p.514) is perhaps formalism?s most notable advocate. In Art (1914), Bell argues
that what is represented by an artwork is irrelevant. Nor does it matter whether something is
portrayed realistically, nor what the artist is like, nor why they created the art, nor the context
surrounding it. It is purely the manipulation of the formal elements which marks something as a
work of art or not, and instructs us as to whether it should be valued. An artist?s goal should be
perfection of form.
Bell thinks that for our discussion of form to be meaningful, there ought to be some universal
principles of form that we judge as desirable. This is difficult because as we have seen, there are
different elements of form which apply to different kinds of art. So perhaps there are descriptions
which can apply across all art to assess the relations between aesthetic features. Perhaps we can
speak of the ?elegance? of an artwork, or its ?balance?, and these could be terms which could apply
just as easily to a painting as to a ballet as to a sculpture.
DISCUSS
1.
Do you agree with Bell that the subject represented by a work is irrelevant
when assessing whether it should be valued as art or not? Use examples in your
response.
Do you think we can clearly say what it is we appreciate in the form of an
artwork?
Can the formal elements of different artworks be compared and valued on the
basis of words such as ?elegance?, ?balance? or ?beauty?? What are some problems
with this suggestion?
To what extent are you persuaded by the formalist theory as a way of assessing
the value of something as art? Did you use any elements of this theory when
completing the ?Art or Not?? exercise on page 515? What are the advantages and
disadvantages of this theory?
VCE Philosophy: Units 1 & 2
@eeeeeoseeeeeeeoosee
eee oeoee Gane eoaeaseeeoee O9eoSSGeasseseseeeeoeaeeeoeeee oe ees
TEXT STUDY: Clive Bell, Art (1914)
[see Useful Resources]
Read paragraphs 1 - 19 as anthologised in Cahn, 2007 (that is, from ?It is improbable
that more nonsense has been written about aesthetics...?

=== Freeland — Art and Moral Knowledge (1997) ===

attack on a fundamentalist construal of the holy word."7
 Does art in such cases present moral claims, and can it provide moral
 knowledge? In what sense? Do photographs, novels, or songs present truths,
 facts, theses, and arguments? Or do they stimulate cognitive activity in some
 other way? What sort of activity, and how is it relevant to morality? And how
 in general is the moral content of works of art related to their artistic value?
 In this essay I shall explore some answers to these questions.
 ART AND COGNITION
 Some people do not think artworks make cognitive contributions. In his
 recent article, "On the Cognitive Triviality of Art," Jerome Stolnitz flatly
 denies that art contributes to knowledge.8 He argues that if art is to add to
 knowledge, then it must provide us with truths; but his exploration of likely
 truths gleaned from great novelists like George Eliot results in findings that
 are "distressingly impoverished." So he concludes that what truths there are
 to be derived from art are "distinctly banal" and "could probably have been
 arrived at otherwise."9 Along with such a narrow, discursive notion of knowl-
 edge, the noncognitivist about art will probably also adopt a narrow con-
 ception of learning as acquiring facts, testing or confirming hypotheses,
 and/or being persuaded by arguments. Such people would say that since art
 cannot teach us facts or offer arguments, we cannot learn from it.
 If art is cognitively trivial, it is hard to see why artworks like those I
 mentioned at the start have been held to be so disturbing in recent contro-
 versies. The alternative view, and the one I favor, is that art is not cognitively
 trivial: it may add to and advance our knowledge. An aesthetician might
 defend this view while retaining a narrow notion of knowledge as the pre-
 sentation of theses and arguments. For example, Levinson, in his article
 "Messages in Art," argues that artists make "utterances" in a communicative
 network; some of these may be proposition-like in nature. Thus, Levinson
 interprets a controversial feminist college art project entitled "Rape Piece"
 as making the utterance that "all college men are potential rapists."10 1 am
 not sure that Levinson himself adopts a narrow account of knowledge in art;
 but one could do so in principle. However, I shall not pursue this sort of nar-
 row cognitivismi about art here.
 In this paper I shall consider two promising cognitivist approaches to
 art: "Aristotelianism" and "pragmatism." Both employ a broadened, nondis-
 12
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 cursive conception of knowledge - not just as theses and propositions, but
 as understanding, insight, empathy, imagination, the creation and discovery
 of new perceptual schémas, new worlds, or new relationships among things.
 For the pragmatist, knowledge in general is broadly conceived: it involves
 acquiring beliefs or explanations that meet the needs of inquirers in certain
 circumstances. In his seminal essay, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear," Peirce
 actually uses a musical metaphor to describe the epistemic notion of belief:
 "And what, then, is belief? Belief is the demi-cadence which closes a musi-
 cal phrase in the symphony of our intellectual life."11 Belief for Peirce is a
 rule for action, something that appeases the irritation of doubt; he comme

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)



tors that are internal and external to the work is hard to maintain. It is
 notoriously controversial whether we ought to separate the meaning of an
 artist's work so sharply from facts about his or her life, since knowledge of
 those facts may affect our construal of features seen in the work. It seems
 psychologically problematic and self-deceptive to admire a film like Triumph
 of the Will without noticing its immoral content or without relating this film
 to other work of Riefenstahl's or considering her relation to the Nazis.25 As
 a comparison, we would feel concern for a friend who loves a beautiful per-
 son without regard to his or her evil character.
 The real problem lies in the formalist's denial that a work's moral con-
 tent can be part of what Gass calls its internal, organic, or "artistic" quality.
 15
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 We need a theory of artistic value that recognizes that in Triumph of the Will ,
 as in the Mapplethorpe images, content is conceptually linked to "internal"
 aesthetic features and values. I agree with Danto that surely Mapplethorpe
 intended to create works with strong erotic content and a certain point of
 view.26 In making such a sharp separation, the formalist effectively denies
 artists the power to express ideas and content in their work. But this seem
 simply false to the facts. The expression of moral ideas has always been cen-
 tral in art - from Greek tragedies, architecture, and sculpture, to Christian
 cathedrals, icons, and Bach masses; from Persian miniatures to landscape
 gardens; from Manuel Bravo public murals to Brecht operettas; from Walker
 Evans photographs to films like Schindler 's List
 In sum, the limitations of formalist autonomy theories of art are these:
 (1) They implausibly separate content in general from what contributes to
 aesthetic value; (2) In particular, they too sharply separate moral content
 from aesthetic features of works; and (3) They do not offer plausible accounts
 of the psychology of experiencing art, because they invoke a self-deceptive
 view about our ability to separate aesthetic from moral judgments about
 works of art. Formalist autonomy theories do not offer an acceptable account
 either of art's moral content or of how we may learn from artworks.
 MORALISM
 The moralist maintains that moral content is relevant - indeed even crucial -
 to a work's artistic functioning and value. If a work of art presents an immoral
 content, it is either bad art or not art at all.27 There are two variants of moral-
 ism. The reductive moralist says that there are certain types of bad content
 that rule a candidate for art out altogether. The strong moralist says that the
 artistic disvalue of a work can be directly inferred from its presentation of
 unacceptable moral content. Many of the critics of Ice-T, Salman Rushdie,
 and Mapplethorpe were extreme moralists who held one of these two views.
 For the moralist, artistic value and moral value are not autonomous.28
 Moralists hold that a work's artistic merit is, to at least some degree, a
 direct function of its moral value. Many moralists seem to hold the overly
 simple view that an artwork's moral value resides in a certain content that
 may be discerned without attention to its artistic features. For example, U.S.
 Senator Al D'Amato exhibited reductive m

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

oralism in denouncing Serrano's
 photograph Piss Christ , the image of a crucifix submerged in urine. D'Amato
 could not even conceive of regarding this image as art. He seemed to infer
 that the work's title was a direct indication of its (unacceptable) content,
 remarking in the U.S. Senate, "to be quite candid, I am somewhat reluctant
 to utter its title. This so-called piece of art is a deplorable, despicable display
 16
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 of vulgarity."29 He went on to refer to the photograph as "this piece of trash,"
 "garbage," and "filth," and he tore up a catalog containing the image on the
 floor of the Senate.
 Strong moralism, in contrast to reductive moralism, allows that a work
 with disgusting or bad content may be art, but considers it bad art to the degree
 that its content is morally problematic. George Dickie defends this sort of
 approach in his book Evaluating Art , and he thinks that Hume also held some-
 thing like it in his essay "On the Standard of Taste." Dickie comments,
 Hume does not give an argument in support of his view, and I
 expect that he did not think that any argument is required. It is
 obvious that many works of art have an integral moral point of
 view, and it was equally obvious to Hume that one cannot take
 a neutral stance toward a moral point of view. Anyone who has
 a moral point of view is bound to evaluate the moral point of
 view of any work that has one. Thus, anyone with a moral point
 of view will find the moral point of view of a work of art that has
 one to be either valuable or disvaluable.30
 In his book Dickie lays out a moralist position that directly infers some degree
 of artistic value or disvalue of a work from the moral value or disvalue of
 what it represents. He also argues that artistic worth varies according to
 whether a work represents the moral value or disvalue of what it shows
 "approvingly or disapprovingly."31 (So, for example, a didactic film like
 Schindler 's List that shows the Nazis disapprovingly thereby gains in artistic
 merit.) Dickie explains, "The representation in works of art of anything valu-
 able (in isolation from the other properties of the work) is always valuable."32
 I criticized formalist autonomy views for too sharply separating moral
 value from aesthetic value. Such theories tend to overemphasize the unique
 value of aesthetic features of artworks (like form). Moralism does link artis-
 tic and moral values, but it goes to the other extreme by not providing enough
 recognition of the role of aesthetic features in establishing moral content. It
 errs by treating moral value as too distinct, independent, and preeminent.
 Dickie may allow that to identify and assess a work's moral value we might
 have to assess and identify its aesthetic or artistic value. But still, the moral
 value of the thing actually represented in the work is always aesthetically
 relevant. He says, "The value of experiencing referent-centered cognitive
 value flows from the value of the thing referred to ."33 Dickie's theory is obvi-
 ously not as crude as Senator D'Amato's, but it too tends to be reductive
 about artistic quality.
 Moralism says too little about how to identify the moral content of a
 work of art. To be fair, at times Dickie acknowledges that content is not just
 "there." His phrasing is revea

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)


gnitivists do not hold that artistic and moral values are
 autonomous or that one type can trump or determine the other type; they are
 more likely to see these two types of value in artworks as fused or concep-
 tually connected. Cognitivists locate a central value of artworks primarily in
 the thoughts or knowledge they communicate, or what we learn from them;
 and they take form or artistic quality to encompass and facilitate these cog-
 nitive dimensions of artworks. Or at least this is true of pragmatists and
 Aristotelians, who employ a broad conception of thoughts or knowledge
 rather than a narrow, discursive one. So they are neither moralists nor for-
 malists about art; instead, they maintain the following claims: (1) Artworks
 may have moral content or present moral knowledge, as revealed by a pro-
 cess of rational interpretation; (2) Artistic features and moral content of works
 of art are conceptually linked; and (3) We can learn from the moral content
 of artworks.
 Cognitivism as a general approach to art is hardly new. It was adopted
 in the ancient world by Plato and Aristotle, even though they disagreed about
 the moral merits of artworks like epic poetry and tragedy. I take the follow-
 ing list to encapsulate central theses in the cognitive view of art:
 (1) Artworks stimulate cognitive activity that may teach us
 about the world. Some say artworks do this because they
 have representational (including expressive) content; oth-
 ers, because they function as symbols within a diversely
 structured system.
 (2) The cognitive activity they stimulate is part and parcel of
 their functioning as artworks.
 (3) As a result of this stimulation, we learn from artworks: we
 acquire fresh knowledge, our beliefs are refined, and our
 understanding is deepened.
 (4) What we learn in this manner constitutes one of the main
 reasons we enjoy and value artworks in the first place.
 Modern cognitivists like Nelson Goodman emphasize representational
 content in art, which may seem surprising given the development of mod-
 ern art movements such as abstract painting and atonal music. However, for
 Goodman "content" is in fact quite broad; it turns out to be a matter of sym-
 bolic functioning and is inseparable from form. It encompasses such features
 of artworks as their style and expression, or even their emotional impact -
 all of these become part of what we "cognize" or understand about a work.
 So Goodman writes, "in aesthetic experience the emotions function cogni-
 tively. ... To some extent, we may feel how a painting looks as we may see
 how it feels."37 Features of art such as style or expression might formerly
 have been treated as "aesthetic properties," but in construing them as rele-
 vant to symbolic functioning, the modern cognitivist shifts attention onto
 19
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 how they function to represent a world and stimulate comprehension. For
 example, when Danto interprets the triptych Jim and Tom , Sausalito as
 Mapplethorpe's way of thinking about the transcendent and spiritual nature
 of sex, he discusses such factors as the triptych format, art-historical allu-
 sions, and the lighting in each frame. "Thinking" thus involves the photog-
 rapher's style, composition, and expressive use of the medium, in addition
 to his depiction of a certain subjec

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

t matter. I now take up more details from
 two modern variants on the cognitive view of art.
 NUSSBAUM' S ARISTOTELIANISM
 Martha Nussbaum offers a general account of moral knowledge and in th
 light makes claims about the kind of moral knowledge we can glean from
 art. She has developed her Aristotelian cognitive view of art in a number
 key works.38 On her view, some artworks - especially novels - have mor
 content; artistic features and moral content are conceptually connected i
 these works; and we can learn from the moral content of these artworks.
 An Aristotelian like Nussbaum tends to give a kind of fused answer t
 the general questions with which I began: what is moral knowledge (in
 artwork), and how can we learn from the moral content of artworks? To s
 how she answers both questions, we can look at her most extensive prese
 tation of her view in the opening chapter of Love's Knowledge. Nussbaum
 adopts an Aristotelian conception of moral knowledge. She explains, "Th
 essays argue for a conception of ethical understanding that involves emo
 tional as well as intellectual activity and gives a certain type of priority
 the perception of particular people and situations, rather than to abstrac
 rules."39 Here Nussbaum follows Aristotle's example in the Nicomachean
 Ethics. He emphasizes the role of emotions and desires in moral judgmen
 claiming that the rationality of ethics involves practical not theoretical w
 dom. Practical wisdom is a unique rational capacity of humans that depen
 upon particularity of perception rather than upon universal rules; Aristot
 repeatedly denies that ethics can be a science.
 Nussbaum highlights features of the Aristotelian moral tradition tha
 are shared by certain novels that she discusses in Love's Knowledge. Thes
 novels present an Aristotelian picture of moral knowledge by supportin
 four key positions. (1) First, these novels, like Aristotle, are committed
 the noncommensurability of valuable things; this allows for deep conflic
 between diverse competing attachments. (2) Second, they endorse the pri
 ority of perceptions. On this view, the perception of particulars of concre
 actions, including awareness of context and of new or unanticipated fe
 tures, is both more action-guiding and more relevant to justification than ar
 20
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 general moral rules and principles. (3) They highlight the ethical value of
 the emotions: emotions are cognitive and have an important part to play in
 our practical reasoning and our moral agency. Finally, (4) these novels illus-
 trate the ethical relevance of uncontrolled happenings. Things that simply
 happen, even reversals of fortune, have significance for how well we can
 lead our lives.40 This last point, the recognition of contingency or moral luck,
 is something Nussbaum particularly admires in ancient philosophers and
 playwrights and calls this trait their openness to tragedy; it was the subject
 of her earlier book The Fragility of Goodness.
 What about moral learning? First, Nussbaum says that we should add
 the study of certain novels (by Eliot, Proust, Dickens, and others) to the study
 of recognized great works in ethics, because these novels exemplify the
 Aristotelian procedure in ethical investigation that Nussbaum finds valuable.41
 So from these novels we can lear

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

n about moral inquiry: what it is, and how
 one pursues it. Even more, they present particular answers, which Nussbaum
 wants to defend, to the basic question of how to live. The appropriate pro-
 cedure begins by asking "How should one live?" and continues on through
 a dialectical examination of the alternatives to advocate a certain answer.
 Nussbaum interprets Henry James' The Golden Bowl , for example, as a moral
 examination of the conflicting claims of a fine sense of moral rightness and
 of erotic attachment and the working out of the right balance between them.42
 Second, literature has certain lessons to teach us as philosophers about
 how to do moral theory, because it reinforces what Nussbaum considers a
 basic point in ethics, that form should fit content.43 That is, she thinks that
 systematic treatises in philosophy have certain ideals of regularization and
 simplicity that cannot capture some aspects of our moral lives and moral
 knowledge in the way that novels can. This is partly a matter of how we react
 to the respective kinds of writing - whether it involves us: "Our actual rela-
 tion to the books we love is already messy, complex, erotic."44 It is also
 because philosophy tends to oversimplify, whereas novels can better present
 "mysterious, various, and complex content"; Nussbaum emphasizes that
 "features that make the novels so unlike dogmatic treatises are, for us, the
 source of their philosophical interest."45 She is attentive to the ways in which
 style enables an author to present a certain point of view. Literary readings
 may help us to read not only literature but also philosophy, because we can
 better discern the style and hence the related message of a philosopher.
 Nussbaum illustrates this point with brief readings of passages from Spinoza
 and Seneca, whose styles are obviously distinctive and relevant to their mes-
 sages. Attention to style can also make a philosopher more attentive to his
 or her own style. Nussbaum mentions that she has found it essential to
 employ different philosophical styles in her various essays to respond to the
 literary works under consideration.46
 21
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Third, in her more recent book Poetic Justice Nussbaum argues that lit-
 erature offers something in addition to both method and content, namely,
 "literary imagination." This is a combination of empathy and detailed, com-
 passionate presentation of characters. She remarks, "The literary imagina-
 tion is a part of public rationality. ... I defend the literary imagination
 precisely because it seems to me an essential ingredient of an ethical stance
 that asks us to concern ourselves with the good of other people whose lives
 are distant from our own."47
 In defending her basic claims, Nussbaum has written extensively about
 a number of literary examples, especially ones drawn from what she herself
 calls "the high literary tradition of Europe and North America."48 This
 includes the ancient tragedians, nineteenth-century realists (Dickens, George
 Eliot), and classical modernists (Henry James, Joyce, Proust, Beckett). In
 Poetic Justice her attention has turned to socially significant legal decisions
 in the United States, for example the notorious anti-homosexual ruling
 Bowers vs. Hardwick. She "reads" these decisions for their literary me

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

rits or
 defects, with the general assumption that the better decisions are those that
 better exemplify the literary imagination. So she faults the judges in Bowers,
 for example, for taking a detached, non-narrative approach that enabled what
 she criticizes as "a distancing strategy." This involved various factors, such
 as use of non-narrative language, severity of language, and enumeration of
 historical condemnations.49 All this, together with lack of an appropriate level
 of generality in looking into the case, precluded what was needed, namely,
 "a careful attention to historical context, and an empathetic consideration of
 the situation of the homosexual in American society."50 Poetic Justice makes
 strong claims about the need for law to become more literary, i.e., to incor-
 porate the values of particularity and compassion or empathy which literary
 imagination would supply.
 On Nussbaum's view, then, we learn from literature not propositions or
 truths, but rather "insights" or "a stance" or "moral capacities."51 This fits
 with her Aristotelian view that cognition is fused with emotional perception,
 and that moral judgments require developed habits and abilities. Let us
 explore two critical issues about Nussbaum's Aristotelian kind of cognitivismi
 about art. First, how does her view overcome the problem faced by both for-
 malists and moralists about content - that is, how does she discern the moral
 content of the artworks she discusses? And, second, how much new moral
 knowledge can artists provide, on her view?
 To discern their moral content, Nussbaum must offer interpretations of
 the works she reads. Sometimes she speaks about what literature "shows"
 us, suggesting the worry that her version of cognitivism does not differ
 enough from Dickie's moralism. Recall that I faulted Dickie for assuming
 that it is somehow simple just to glean the moral content of an artwork such
 22
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 as a tragedy. Nussbaum emphasizes that literature requires perceptive read-
 ing, and she produces lengthy interpretations of various works. Even so, at
 times she appears to think that the meaning of a work is fairly definite and
 fixed. Thus she writes, "I am interested, then, in all and only those thoughts,
 feelings, wishes, movements, and other processes that are actually there to
 be seen in the text."52 An example of her "unproblematizing" approach may
 be found in this passage about The Golden Bowl: "This novel, I have indi-
 cated, is about the development of a woman. To be a woman, to give herself
 to her husband, Maggie will need to come to see herself as something
 cracked, imperfect, unsafe, a vessel with a hole through which water may
 pass, a steamer compartment no longer tightly sealed."53
 To be fair to Nussbaum, in Love's Knowledge she develops complex,
 elaborate readings of many works she discusses.54 Unfortunately, such read-
 ings may well be contested. This happened in the case of her readings of
 tragedies, as reviewers of The Fragility of Goodness cited gaps or idiosyn-
 crasies in her treatments.55 But if others disagree with her interpretation of
 a work, then they will more than likely disagree with her account of the moral
 knowledge it offers. For instance, John Cooper argued that her interpreta-
 tion of Euripides' Hecuba was mistaken:

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 Hecuba is not, as Nussbaum thinks,
 a good woman driven mad by tragedy, but rather a woman revealed to be
 weak and flawed by her failure to face tragedy with strength. But this means
 Euripides did not in fact manifest the openness to tragedy that Nussbaum
 ascribes to him. This drives home the point that works of art have moral con-
 tent and stimulate moral learning only under an interpretation.
 In Poetic Justice Nussbaum acknowledges that readings of literature vary
 across individuals, eras, and cultures. She endorses Wayne Booth's approach
 to interpretation in his book The Company We Keep : An Ethics of Fiction,
 where he says we must not only read books but have critical conversations
 about them with others.56 Along these lines, Nussbaum envisions a kind of
 public, rational discussion about the meaning of significant works. She pre-
 sumably thinks that publishing her own interpretations of novels (as well as
 court cases) is in fact part of this public and critical conversation. Thus, rejoin-
 ders by other scholars might be welcome if they help us to describe, "really
 read," and assess the moral views of, say, Euripides or Sophocles, Dickens,
 or James. She sees reading itself in this sense as part of the creation of com-
 munity along the lines required by Aristotelian moral inquiry.57
 A second question to raise about Nussbaum's Aristotelian picture of
 moral knowledge is whether her moral commitments are "thick" or "thin."
 Is her theory again too much like Dickie's moralism, so that she knows in
 advance what is morally acceptable, or what is not, about a work? That is, an
 Aristotelian moral view carries with it certain "thick" moral commitments.
 Aristotle held a view about human nature, its needs and capabilities, and he
 23
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 used this to ground his account of human virtue and happiness (eudaimonia).
 To some degree at least, Nussbaum endorses this naturalism of Aristotle's
 and sees it as a way of blocking relativism.58 To what extent, then, will her
 commitments be subject to revision in encounters with literature or other art-
 works that might provide genuinely new outlooks? In Love's Knowledge
 Nussbaum says she has chosen to discuss novels that exemplify a certain (i.e.,
 Aristotelian) procedure and also certain (i.e., Aristotelian) answers to the
 question of how to define a good life. And in Poetic Justice she defends
 novels for their power to stimulate empathy and moral imagination. The good
 life involves a certain element of contingency that is dealt with through moral
 virtue. What would Nussbaum say about a novel like J. G. Ballard's Crash,
 which seems to overemphasize contingency and fate? In this book the nar-
 rator, after a car crash involving a fatality, becomes obsessed with and emu-
 lates a character named Vaughan, the "nightmare angel of the expressways"
 who has "spent his life staging death." Vaughan collects albums full of pic-
 tures of crash victims and can only find sexual excitement exploring the pos-
 sibilities of scars and wounds. The narrator (also named Ballard) writes, "In
 our wounds we celebrated the re-birth of the traffic-slain dead, the deaths and
 injuries of those we had seen dying by the roadside and the imaginary wounds
 and postures of the millions yet to die."59 Nussbaum's Aristotelian convic

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)


learn from art's moral content. I shall focus on works by Hilar
 Putnam, a current pragmatist who addresses questions of ethics and valu
 We shall begin with the two broad opening questions I asked abo
 Nussbaum's Aristotelianism: What is the pragmatist account of the nature
 moral knowledge, and how does art provide such knowledge - that is, ho
 and what can we learn from it?
 Like the Aristotelian, the pragmatist holds that knowledge is not simply
 knowledge of propositions and truths. What we learn from art depends upon
 our aims, situations, and purposes. There can be knowledge how and emo-
 tional knowledge, for example. Art can convey knowledge of how to per-
 ceive the world around us, something not readily reducible to a series of
 25
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 propositions. Thus in Art as Experience Dewey notes that understanding art
 is like understanding another person.64 Furthermore, art is integrally linked
 to a culture; Dewey claims that art expresses the life of the community. Moral
 life in general cannot be discussed outside the context of a culture and "can-
 not go on without the support of a moral environment"; such an environment
 "is created by the collective art of a time."65
 In Languages of Art and later works, Nelson Goodman revised and
 extended this pragmatist view of art. Goodman's organicism and naturalism
 are not so readily apparent as Dewey's, yet I think they are present, espe-
 cially when he makes comments like this: "What we know through art is felt
 in our bones and nerves and muscles as well as grasped by our minds. . . .
 [A]ll the sensitivity and responsiveness of the organism participates in the
 invention and interpretation of symbols."66 Goodman describes artworks as
 complex structures of symbols that achieve meaning and reference in a vari-
 ety of specific ways. They contribute to and enlarge upon our understanding
 of a world.67 Goodman articulates criteria that make either scientific hypothe-
 ses or artworks successful: clarity, elegance, and a kind of fittingness: 'Truth
 and its aesthetic counterpart amount to appropriateness under different
 names."68 On the pragmatist view, scientific views and artworks create
 worlds that seem right in relation to our needs and habits (or what can become
 our habits). They help us, as Goodman puts it at the very conclusion of
 Languages of Art, "in the creation and comprehension of our worlds." I quote
 the following extended passage from Goodman because it offers a detailed
 account of how much the pragmatist counts as knowledge in art:
 Symbolization, then, is to be judged fundamentally by how well
 it serves the cognitive purpose: by the delicacy of its discrimi-
 nations and the aptness of its allusions; by the way it works in
 grasping, exploring, and informing the world; by how it analyzes,
 sorts, orders, and organizes; by how it participates in the mak-
 ing, manipulation, retention, and transformation of knowledge.
 Considerations of simplicity and subtlety, power and precision,
 scope and selectivity, familiarity and freshness, are all relevant
 and often contend with one another; their weighting is relative
 to our interests, our information, and our inquiry.69
 The effectiveness of symbol systems in art, as in science, is context-
 dependent. This explains why artworks, like scientific

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

theories, change in
 both their appeal and their capacity to shock or fascinate over time: "A work
 may be successively offensive, fascinating, comfortable, and boring."70
 Goodman entertains the possibility that art affords moral knowledge in his
 discussion of the related notion of "lightness of rendering" in Ways of
 Worldmaking. This notion goes beyond truth to include "standards of accept-
 ability that sometimes supplement or even compete with truth ... or replace
 truth for nondeclarative renderings."71 While Goodman acknowledges that
 26
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 "any treatment of lightness may, of course, give rise to speculation con-
 cerning an application to moral lightness" he avoids this context, com-
 menting that "I willingly leave that to others."72
 Among the few "others" who have risen to this challenge is Hilary
 Putnam. In fact, Putnam criticizes Goodman and Quine for neglecting ethics
 in their pragmatist programs. He says that they "have been somewhat hesi-
 tant to forthrightly extend the same approach [viz., their pragmatism] to our
 moral images of ourselves and the world. Yet what can giving up the spec-
 tator view in philosophy mean if we don't extend the same approach to the
 most indispensible 'versions' of ourselves and the world that we possess?
 Like William James ... I propose to do exactly that."73 Putnam has articu-
 lated a pragmatist conception of moral knowledge, together with some claims
 about how this knowledge may be found in works of art, especially litera-
 ture. Let us first consider his view of moral knowledge.
 Putnam says that he agrees with earlier pragmatist critiques of moral a
 priorism.74 Yet he does not endorse moral skepticism or cultural relativism,
 and he does maintain that there is moral knowledge. Though there are no
 moral "facts," some ethical principles are likely to have a "large measure of
 objectivity."75 He sketches a pragmatist argument "that the belief in the cog-
 nitive status of value judgments underlies an enormous amount of our prac-
 tice."76 Putnam's pragmatism thus leads him to reject narrow instrumentalist
 notions of rationality that compare ethics unfavorably to other, allegedly
 more legitimate (or "more rational") forms of knowledge, like science. He
 holds that justification in ethics is also - equally - a rational enterprise, one
 that involves recognizing that " all values, including the cognitive ones, get
 their authority from our idea of human flourishing and our idea of reason.
 These two ideas are interconnected: our image of an ideal theoretical intel-
 ligence is simply a part of our ideal of total human flourishing
 explicitly invokes Dewey's conception of inquiry as his own p
 the search for knowledge, noting that Dewey rejected the mod
 rithm: "According to the pragmatists, whether the subject b
 ethics, what we have are maxims and not algorithms; and maxims
 require contextual interpretation."78
 Given this view of moral knowledge, what does Putnam say
 moral content of art, or about what we can learn from artworks?
 lier essays he assumed a less pragmatic, more narrowly discurs
 knowledge, and contrasted what we can derive from literature
 of knowledge required for ethics. In "Literature, Science, and
 published in 1976, Putnam argued that literature differs from
 a source of moral kn

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

owledge. Literary works offer only what
 ceptual knowledge, "an imaginative re-creation of moral perpl
 don't learn that certain things are true from a novelist, but wh
 27
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 looks like to someone who thinks that."79 Thus perhaps one learns from
 Medea about how jealousy and wrath could lead a woman to harm her chil-
 dren, or from The Brothers Karamazov why a son would kill a father from
 jealous passion. Such conceptual knowledge, says Putnam, may amount to
 a new interpretation of the facts. He says it should be more than knowledge
 of mere possibilities; a novelist like Celine who writes only about the
 "merely" possible is weak.
 Conceptual knowledge, in this essay, is contrasted with genuine moral
 knowledge, which Putnam says is "propositional" and "factual" knowledge
 of standards and principles. Conceptual knowledge is inferior because it has
 not been tested. Thus presumably the conceptual knowledge of what it might
 feel like to be a Medea capable of killing her children does not offer us gen-
 uine moral knowledge about whether, in any circumstances, infanticide is
 justifiable or morally right. Though what we derive from literature is not fac-
 tual knowledge, the conceptual knowledge it affords is worthwhile. So
 Putnam writes, "Objectivity of ethical principles is connected with such
 things as width of appeal, ability to withstand rational criticism, feasibility,
 ideality, and what it feels like to live by them or attempt to live by them.
 Imagination and sensibility are essential instruments of practical reasoning.
 The literary imagination does really help us to understand ourselves and life
 (reasoning about how to live)."80 Novelists who use the medium appropri-
 ately give us something that we need in order to gain moral knowledge.
 Putnam returned to this topic in his 1983 response to Nussbaum, 'Taking
 Rules Seriously." In most of this essay he still presents a somewhat narrow
 view of how much knowledge literature can offer, emphasizing the differ-
 ence between knowledge from literature and real moral knowledge. He sug-
 gests that when we do gain moral knowledge from a novel, it is because of
 a philosophical discussion or description of the book, rather than from the
 work itself. Thus he notes with approval Richard Wollheim's thought that it
 is the commentary on a literary work, not the work itself, which may be a
 work of moral philosophy.81
 Still, Putnam acknowledges that imagination and sensibility are essen-
 tial instruments of moral reasoning and that literature may be useful because
 it demonstrates that moral reasoning takes place in a context.82 However, he
 begins to note problems in drawing the distinction between literature and
 philosophy when he confesses that "I suspect that both the ontological pre-
 tensions and the epistemological pretensions of philosophy have failed."83
 And in a few concluding sentences of the essay he uses scare quotes to indi-
 cate his doubts about certain purported distinctions between fictional works
 and moral philosophy, acknowledging the possibility that perhaps moral
 works in philosophy are themselves not "foundations" or "methodologies"
 but are themselves like works of literature:
 28
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)


egesis/commentary distinction cannot be drawn.
 Any exegesis that is nontrivial must, to that extent, be commentary-laden."90
 What, then, is a commentary? In short, it is an account of implications of
 what someone - whether Aristotle or Henry James - wrote "about our prob-
 lems." Thus "getting at" the moral content of a work and presenting it in
 some discursive format or commentary actually turns out to be the same as
 interpreting the work, in the sense of construing how it says what it says.
 Philosophy and literature are on a par, then, because each kind of writing
 needs interpretation-cum-commentary so that we can see how its moral
 images speak to us in our current situations of intellectual and moral per-
 plexity. Interpretation, like other forms of intellectual inquiry, is context-
 dependent and varies according to people's positions, assumptions, and
 surrounding institutions.91
 And what can we say about Putnam's moral commitments? His pragma-
 tism at first appears to be remarkably similar to Nussbaum's Aristotelianism
 in that, like her, he holds that rational debate is relevant and possible in ethics,
 and he thinks that rational debate is grounded in the rationality of the com-
 munity. Putnam alludes less to Aristotle's views on moral justification, though,
 than to the picture of rationality developed by Peirce and followed up on by
 the Frankfurt School.92 Eventually we reach not Aristotle's grounding in
 human needs and capacities, nor a rational foundation like the Moral Law, but
 rather the "bedrock" of our commitments to which Wittgenstein referred when
 he said that, ultimately, for either ethics or epistemology, we must insist sim-
 ply, "This is where my spade is turned." So Putnam rejects a strict founda-
 tionalism as sought by both capital "E" Epistemology and capital "M"
 Metaphysics, but he still insists that this is not "Feyerabendian relativism";
 rational criticism of a moral vision is possible.93
 Given that Putnam says that what we need are more and more varied
 moral images, and that we still need better accounts in philosophy of the
 nature of moral reasoning, then it would seem that in our commentaries we
 need to reason about all the moral images we can consider, both those of
 philosophers and those of novelists. In suggesting that philosophical systems
 of morality are not different in kind from literature, in that both offer us
 human creations, or moral images, Putnam has, in effect, dropped his ear-
 lier distinction between conceptual and factual knowledge about morality.
 He has, in fact, moved closer to a position like Dewey's - we should recall
 that Dewey claimed that art actually has more moral power than the "reflec-
 tive treatises" of philosophers.94
 30
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 CONCLUSION
 The pragmatist and the Aristotelian both argue that art may function to inform
 and illuminate the world and our lives - including our moral lives. It is a cen
 tral strength of cognitivism that it regards moral content and artistic func-
 tioning of a work as more integrally connected than they are on either of th
 simple views I described at the start, namely, formalism or moralism. So
 artwork may both challenge and stimulate us; it can engage the viewer simul
 taneously with both artistic interpretation and moral reflection.
 There are,

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

 of course, other kinds of cognitive theories of art besides thos
 I have described here. Recent years have seen a proliferation of cognitiv
 studies of various art forms, including music, film, visual arts, and literatur
 Many of these views employ broad notions of knowledge. They emphasize
 ways in which the experience of art both utilizes and enhances our vario
 cognitive skills, including not just imagination but perception of our chan
 ing environment, of sound or spatial relationships, and so on
 Since both the pragmatist and the Aristotelian use very broad concep
 tions of knowledge, their views of art will be rejected by someone who main
 tains that moral knowledge must take a specific and narrower discursive form
 as propositions or truths.95 Someone with this sort of narrow view of th
 nature of moral knowledge will be likely to maintain that at best art afford
 examples or illustrations, that it cannot be a source of such knowledge.
 Nussbaum and Putnam acknowledge the important role of interpreta-
 tion (or what Putnam calls "commentaries"); these are required in order t
 provide accounts of the ways artworks serve as a source of moral know
 edge. Often the confusion and lack of dialogue in the recent cases show th
 to understand an artwork's moral content requires fairly complex acts of arti
 tic interpretation. Islamic fundamentalists don't understand the vocabular
 of magical realism; Mapplethorpe's critics don't understand his gay urb
 S&M aesthetic; and Serrano's critics don't understand that Piss Christ cou
 mean something other than "Piss on Christ." For Nussbaum and Putnam, t
 content/value distinction is more complex than it is according to the formali
 or moralist. Cognitive views better reflect and explain these recent debate
 about art.
 As a final comment, it is worth noting that both Nussbaum's an
 Putnam's accounts of art and moral knowledge focus mainly on literatur
 We can ask whether their views can be generalized to other arts. Nussbau
 does think that novels are special, and she notes salient features of the nove
 it is still a living form, and it offers us great narrative detail, emotional expres-
 siveness, a concrete depiction of different ways of life, and an interest in t
 ordinary. She acknowledges that other art forms, like film, may offer simi
 lar features that make them moral resources.96 1 believe that her account
 31
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 the moral content of art can be generalized to other art forms - other forms
 also do the key things that she attributes to the novel: they consider philo-
 sophical questions and provide methods of pursuing them as well as actual
 answers. To see how they do this we would need to look in more detail at
 interpretations like those I mentioned at the start, at what, for example,
 Levinson says about Ice-T's denunciation of commercial values in his rap
 song, or at Lippard's claims about Serrano's idiosyncratic homage to
 Christianity.
 Can songs or photographs also supply something akin to Nussbaum's
 "literary imagination"? I think we can say yes if we look at, say, Danto's dis-
 cussion of Mapplethorpe's images. Danto reads these images as the repre-
 sentation and expression of the photographer's empathetic relationship with
 subjects who trusted him to portray a lifestyle they shared, and one that so

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

me
 people considered worth exploring. Danto thinks that the success of the
 images lies in making this point of view available to someone like himself
 who finds what is pictured "fairly repellent," but who can still recognize a
 continuum of sexual imagination between what is pictured and more main-
 stream trappings of sexual fantasy like, say, black lingerie.97 And perhaps
 we could say that photographs like Piss Christ or rap songs like "Pusher"
 also supply moral images, to use Putnam's terms. Putnam emphasizes the
 need for interpretations or exegeses, and there does not seem to be any good
 reason to suppose that exegeses could not reveal the moral images offered
 by such artworks.
 I suspect that the real reason for philosophers to focus on literature can
 be found in Nussbaum's remarks about how sensitivity to literature can also
 illuminate the style or form of philosophy. Novels, like philosophical texts,
 are made of words. Nussbaum can thus read Spinoza or Seneca or Lucretius
 for their literary qualities; but how do we find the elements of a philosopher
 that are painterly, filmic, photographic, or musical? Maybe this is a limita-
 tion of philosophers, though (or of our view of what counts as philosophy) -
 and not a limitation of cognitive theories of art.
 NOTES
 1. Various versions of this paper have been read at the University of Pennsylvania, the
 Australian National University, the University of Sydney, Rice University, and the
 University of Wales, Aberystwyth (at the "Literature and Ethics" conference). I thank
 many people at these venues for helpful questions and comments (especially the partic-
 ipants in my seminars at the ANU, including Paul Thom, Jennifer McMahon, Natalie
 Stoljar, Ian Gold, and Michael Smith). David Hills offered generous (and detailed) help-
 ful comments on several drafts. I am also grateful for support received from the University
 of Houston and the Australian National University.
 2. On Aeschylus, see Thomas Gould, The Ancient Quarrel Between Poetry and Philosophy
 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), 122-23; on Michelangelo, see Leo
 32
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 Steinberg, The Sexuality of Christ in Renaissance Art and in Modern Oblivion, 2d ed.,
 rev. and expanded (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 19-21 and
 146-47.
 3. Lucy Lippard, 'The Spirit and The Letter," Art in America (Apr. 1990): 244. This essay
 is reprinted and excerpted in Culture Wars: Documents from the Recent Controversies in
 the Arts, ed. Richard Bolton (New York: New Press, 1992), 201-05.
 4. Lippard, in Culture Wars, 201.
 5. Arthur Danto, Playing with the Edge : The Photographic Achievement of Robert
 Mapplethorpe (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1996), 91; see
 also 83-95. "What he [Mapplethorpe] did, almost inconceivably, was confer a certain
 radiance on the act and even the tawdry place where it happens" (90).
 6. Jerrold Levinson, "Messages in Art," in Art and Its Messages: Meaning, Morality, and
 Society, ed. Stephen Davies (University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press,
 1997), 78-81.
 7. Wendy Steiner, The Scandal of Pleasure: Art in an Age of Fundamentalism (Chicago and
 London: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 105.
 8. Jerome Stolnitz, "On the Cognitive Triviality of Art," Briti

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

sh Journal of Aesthetics 32
 (1992): 191-200. For a discussion and critique of this view, see T. J. Diffey, "What Can
 We Learn from Art?" in Art and Its Messages, 26-33.
 9. Stolnitz, "On the Cognitive Triviality of Art," 194, 200.
 10. Levinson, "Messages in Art," 78. 1 should point out that Levinson adds various qualifiers
 to this interpretation and is not hasty to assert its truth!
 1 1 . Charles Sanders Peirce, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear," in Pragmatism: A Contemporary
 Reader, ed. Russell Goodman (New York and London: Routledge, 1995), 41.
 12. Ibid., 43. See also William James in "Pragmatism's Conception of Truth": "Any idea that
 helps us to deal, whether practically or intellectually, with either the reality or its belong-
 ings, that doesn't entangle our progress in frustrations, that fits, in fact, and adapts our
 life to the reality's whole setting, will agree sufficiently to meet the requirement"
 C Pragmatism : The Classic Writings, ed. H. S. Thayer [Indianapolis and Cambridge:
 Hackett, 1982], 234).
 13.1 think this is so, even though I am in agreement with scholars like Myles Burnyeat and
 Bas Van Fraassen who have discussed the role of "understanding" in Aristotle and high-
 lighted pragmatic elements of Aristotle's philosophy of science. For an overview, see my
 "Scientific Explanation and Empirical Data in Aristotle's Meteorology. in Oxford Studies
 in Ancient Philosophy 1 (1990): 67-102; and "Accidental Causes and Real Explanations,"
 in Essays on Aristotle's Physics, ed. Lindsay Judson (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
 1991), 49-72.
 14. For examples and further discussion, see chap. 9, "Art and Morals," in Melvin Rader and
 Bertram Jessup, Art and Human Values (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1976),
 212-34. Rader and Jessup label the distinction I have in mind "aestheticism" versus "moral-
 ism," and while they do not describe these views exactly as I do here, most examples they
 list under each category would fit my descriptions as well.
 15. I here discount "aesthetic idea" types of formalists like Suzanne Langer or R. G.
 Collingwood; they really count more as cognitivists, the way I read them, since the "form"
 of art presents ideas. (Jennifer McMahon drew this point to my attention.)
 16. For Kant, the beautiful object carries no particular cognitive content, but rather its form
 stimulates "free play of imagination," a kind of harmonious interplay between under-
 standing and sensibility that is a disinterested and universally communicable state of
 mind. It is a sensible analog of the rationally grounded impersonality characteristic of
 moral judgment. This is why Kant calls beauty a symbol of morality. See Ted Cohen,
 "Why Beauty Is a Symbol of Morality," in Essays in Kant's Aesthetics, ed. Ted Cohen
 and Paul Guyer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), 221-36.
 17. For an overview, see Deane W. Curtin, "Varieties of Aesthetic Formalism," Journal of
 Aesthetics and Art Criticism 40 (1982): 315-26.
 33
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

----- page break -----

 18. William Gass, 'The Baby or the Botticelli," in his Finding a Form (New York: Alfred A.
 Knopf, 1996), 287.
 19. Kramer, "Is Art Above the Laws of Decency?" New York Times, July 2, 1989; reprinted
 in Culture Wars, 54.
 20. Ibid., 55.
 21. Danto responds to this point; for a summary, see Danto, Playing with the

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)



 Ways ofWorldmaking (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978).
 68. Goodman, Languages of Art, 264; see also 255-65.
 69. Ibid., 258.
 70. Ibid., 259.
 71. Goodman, WaysofWorldmaking, 110.
 72. Ibid., 109-10n. 1.
 73. Hilary Putnam, The Many Faces of Realism: The Paul Carus Lectures (La Salle, 111.:
 Open Court, 1987), 21; hereafter this work is referred to as MF.
 74. "Pragmatism and Moral Objectivity," in Words and Life, ed. James Conant (Cambridge,
 Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), 151.
 75. See Putnam, MF, 77-78, and "Literature, Science, and Reflection," in Meaning and the
 Moral Sciences (Boston and London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978), 93.
 76. Putnam, "Pragmatism and Moral Objectivity," 160.
 77. Putnam, "Beyond the Fact/Value Dichotomy," in Realism with a Human Face, ed. James
 Conant (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), 141; Putnam's emphasis;
 hereafter referred to as RwHF.
 78. Putnam, "Pragmatism and Moral Objectivity," 172.
 79. Putnam, "Literature, Science, and Reflection," 89.
 80. Ibid., 91.
 81. Putnam, 'Taking Rules Seriously," in RwHF, 200.
 82. Ibid., 193-200.
 83. Ibid., 200.
 84. Ibid.
 85. Putnam, MF, 51. In 'Taking Rules Seriously," he does not use the term "moral images"
 but does refer to "normative pictures" presented by Aristotle and Kant; see esp. 197.
 86. Putnam, MF, 78.
 87. Mark Johnson also defends the view that morality - even a putatively "pure" rationalis-
 tic ethics like Kant's - is chiefly a matter of metaphor and moral imagination in his book,
 Moral Imagination: Implications of Cognitive Science for Ethics (Chicago and London:
 University of Chicago Press, 1993); on Kant see esp. 65-77.
 88. Putnam, "Is There a Fact of the Matter about Fiction?" in RwHF, 209-13.
 89. Ibid., 212.
 90. Ibid., 213.
 91. Ibid., 210.
 92. Putnam, MF, 81-83. Though Putnam agrees with Apel and Habermas that claims aiming
 at truth and warrant must recognize implicitly the authority of an ongoing community
 which must have a certain structure, he thinks that this project is still too Kantian, too
 much an attempt to construct a universal ethic; see MF, 53-56.
 93. Ibid., 86.
 94. John Dewey, Art as Experience, 345.
 95. Stolnitz, "On the Cognitive Triviality of Art."
 96. This issue of whether her view might apply to other artistic media is something Nussbaum
 briefly acknowledges in her "Endnote" to the Beckett essay in LK, 312-13.
 97. Danto, Playing with the Edge, 93-95.
 36
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)129.127.145.243 on Thu, 01 Jun 2023 05:18:00 +00:00(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
